{"/news/2021-12-03/bhps-vaccine-mandate-unlawful-fair-work-commission-finds/100673390": {"description": "'Arrogant' BHP lashed by union after losing mine vaccine mandate fight over failure to consult workers", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The full bench of the Fair Work Commission has found a decision by mining giant BHP to make COVID-19 vaccinations at a Hunter Valley mine mandatory was not lawful or reasonable. BHP Billiton's Mt Arthur coal mine were stood down Lawyers for union officials fought against the mandate, arguing there was a lack of consultation. On Friday the commission's full bench said the direction was not covered by the mine's enterprise agreement for workers. The CFMEU, which spearheaded the court action, says the decision is a \"win for the rights of workers\" and slammed BHP as \"arrogant\" in the way it went about imposing the mandate. BHP said it was \"assessing the implications of the decision\" and noted that the commission had acknowledged the dangers posed by COVID-19. The dispute had been deemed a '\"seminal case\" because of its potential ramifications for workplace vaccination rules. But in its judgement, the commission said the outcome might have been different if BHP had handled things differently: \"Had the respondent consulted the employees in accordance with its consultation obligations – such that we could have been satisfied that the decision to introduce the site access requirement was the outcome of a meaningful consultation process – the above considerations would have provided a strong case in favour of a conclusion that the site access requirement was a reasonable direction.\" CFMEU Northern Mining and NSW Energy District president Peter Jordan said the company had acted without seeking feedback from its employees. \"BHP was arrogant in imposing its mandatory vaccination policy without genuine workforce consultation or the backing of a public health order,\" he said. \"We are pleased the full bench of the Fair Work Commission has determined that the site access requirement at Mt Arthur was not a lawful or reasonable direction. \"The decision is a win for the rights of workers to be genuinely consulted about matters affecting them under state workplace health and safety laws. \"We will continue to work through the detail of this decision and represent the interests of all our members — especially those who have been stood down without pay as a result of this unlawful direction.\" Workplace law expert Michael Tooma says the commission's judgement is \"very important\". \"It shows what we have known for some time — that the Achilles heel to the mandatory vaccination programs that are being run is really this consultation point, and the full bench really focused in on consultation,\" he said. \"What's good about this is that we now have some clarity as to the minimum expectations in relation to a [vaccination] program and how that is to be rolled out — and we have a full bench decision and the full bench is not saying, 'You can't do this.' \"What they're saying is, 'You need to do it properly.'\" In a statement, BHP noted that the Fair Work Commission had acknowledged the risks of COVID-19 and said in its judgement that \"further consultation should occur\". \"The science is clear that vaccination saves lives,\" the statement said. \"BHP supports widespread vaccination as the path forward for the Australian economy. \"We are assessing the implications of the decision and will work with the commission, our people, and union representatives to ensure our workplace remains as safe as possible for our people, their families and the community.\" Before the decision today BHP's legal team told the commission that \"the status quo\" was \"that health and safety controls must be complied with\" and said it was was obliged to protect its workforce. But at an earlier hearing the workers argued that the mandate was unlawful because it did not comply with consultation requirements in their employment agreement. BHP rejected that claim and told the court it sought feedback from staff via company emails sent to employees. But workers who gave evidence said there had been issues around accessing company emails. BHP's health and safety representative was questioned in depth about consultation and acknowledged that prior to the mandate being announced the word \"consultation\" was not used. The health and safety representative also agreed that in advice issued three days before the October 7 announcement company documents did not include the word \"mandatory\". Sign up here"}, "/news/2021-12-03/diesel-crisis-adblue-shortage-supply-china/100673482": {"description": "Diesel crisis threatens to grind Australia to a halt, transport industry warns", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Diesel trucks and the people who drive them are often described as the lifeblood of Australia — almost everything we buy in this country spends some time on the road. Now, the transport industry is warning of a potential crisis that could see the nation's diesel trucks grind to a halt. There's a looming shortage of an important chemical used to remove pollution from the exhaust of diesel trucks. Without it, the trucks can't run. \"In most of the modern diesels, there's a chemical added to the system called AdBlue,\" Warren Clark, from the National Road Transport Association, told the ABC.  \"A lot of the AdBlue, or the chemical that goes into making it, is imported from China. \"The supply of that chemical urea has dried up from China. And hence, there's now a massive shortage of AdBlue In this country.\" AdBlue's key ingredient, urea, is also used to make fertiliser for agriculture. Mr Clark said there were a few reasons why the supply from China had been switched off. \"We've heard things like the cost of fertiliser in China has internally gone up dramatically, and a large portion of that is urea,\" he said. \"So what they've said is that they do not want to export any urea to try and keep the price of local fertiliser down. \"It may be that there's some sort of trade issue that they've got with other countries around the world. \"It's not just Australia that's being impacted by this, you know, the whole world is going to be impacted by the lack of this AdBlue chemical.\" He warned if Australia did not come up with a new supply of urea, and therefore AdBlue, a crisis loomed. \"This could be a very, very big issue for the whole country. Not every modern diesel, but a large portion of the modern diesels rely on AdBlue to actually operate,\" Mr Clark said. \"So we're talking about trucks, we're talking about tractors, harvesters, agriculture, we're talking about power generation in South Australia, we're talking about the whole country is going to be impacted if we don't solve this lack of supply.\" Mr Clark said people would have different views about how soon the shortage would be felt. \"I had a member call the other day. They've got 250 prime movers. So they're a big organisation, a lot of their fuel they buy in bulk — they are basically out of AdBlue next week,\" he said. \"We believe that there's enough supply of it 'til about February next year. \"If this is not solved by then, then we have a major problem.\" Mr Clark said if that occurs, trucks would stop running. \"So you're not got anything getting delivered to supermarkets, you've got power not being generated,\" he said. \"In South Australia, you've got tractors that can't harvest, you've got hospitals that don't have back-up generators, all this sort of thing. \"So it's a major problem, if it doesn't get solved.\" Mr Clark said he was discussing the issue with the office of Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce. He said the government had to act fast. \"This is a national supply chain issue and what needs to happen here is bigger than industry, this is a government issue,\" he said.  \"And we need to work with the government to try and find additional supplies of the chemical or different countries that we can import it from or get it from, or we need to increase the manufacture of AdBlue in this country.\" David Smith runs a family trucking business in South Australia. He's also the chair of the Australian Trucking Association. \"I'm very worried... there's no doubt there is a chronic shortage of urea in this country,\" he told the ABC. \"AdBlue is used in not all trucks — in older trucks it's not used — but anything from [the emissions standard] Euro 4 on, and it's injected into the exhaust to eliminate your nitrous oxide, [which is the ] harmful products out of the exhaust from burning diesel.\" Mr Smith said his business was \"already starting to be affected\". \"Some suppliers are actually running very low at the moment and approaching other suppliers — that hasn't had a direct link to trucks just yet,\" he said. \"But the shortage is here and it is only a matter of time. Unless we can source some extra urea to make the product, it is going to have a direct impact. \"So I'm very worried at the moment. Firstly, we can't operate trucks without the AdBlue. Secondly, the price is going through the roof. \"Last week, it went up five cents a litre. This week, it's gone up 10 cents a litre. So that reflects the shortage straightaway.\" A spokesman for Mr Joyce said the government was aware of the concerns and was monitoring the situation."}, "/news/2021-12-03/asx-wallstreet-markets-currencies-commodities/100670494": {"description": "ASX edges higher after US stocks rebound, CSL slumps on Vifor takeover speculation ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The Australian share market has pared its gains amid worries about the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, with market heavyweight CSL plunging on takeover speculation. The market increased by nearly 1 per cent in the first hour of trade on Friday, after Wall Street rebounded from heavy losses. However, it fell into the red over lunchtime, before clawing back the losses. The All Ordinaries index ended up 0.1 per cent to 7,543, while the ASX 200 put on 0.2 per cent to 7,241. Most sectors ended higher, with oil and gas firms, banks and miners boosting the market, while health care firms led the falls as biotech CSL slumped by nearly 3 per cent. The best performers on the ASX 200 were radiology software firm Pro Medicus (+3.8pc) and investment firm Washington H Soul Pattinson (+3.3pc) and Corporate Travel Management (+3.1pc). All the big banks gained with NAB, ANZ and Westpac rising by more than 1 per cent.  TPG Telecom slumped 8.6 per cent, the worst performer on the ASX 200, after founder David Teoh decided to sell 53.1 million shares, representing 3 per cent of the company. Also going down were technology firm Codan (-4.7pc) and online retailer Kogan (-4.2pc). The Australian dollar dipped 0.3 per cent to 70.73 US cents in afternoon trade, after new data showed that China's services industry expanded at a slower pace last month because of inflationary pressures and COVID-19 outbreaks.  Vaccine-maker CSL refused to comment on media reports it was in talks to buy Swiss pharmaceutical firm Vifor Pharma Group for a reported $10 billion.  In a statement to the Australian Securities Exchange, CSL said it noted the media speculation. \"CSL regularly assesses strategic opportunities that can improve its business, improve the health of people around the world and provide value to shareholders,\" it said. \"There is no certainty that any transaction will result from CSL's consideration of such opportunities and, if any transaction does result, when such a transaction would occur.\" Vifor also refused to comment on the market speculation.  \"Vifor Pharma Group systematically reviews options that can strengthen its market position and/or accelerate the growth of the company both organically and through partnerships and acquisitions.\" CSL shares fell 2.5 per cent to $297.67. Vifor's shares surged by 21 per cent on the Swiss share market on the news. Global miner BHP said its board had approved a plan to scrap the company's dual-listed structure ahead of a shareholder vote on the proposal next month.  In August,  the miner decided to simplify its corporate structure from two parent companies and two share prices, into one firm headquartered in Australia. BHP has traded on the stock exchanges in Australia and the United Kingdom since 2001, when it merged with Billiton.  It will still trade on markets in Australia, London, New York and Johannesburg. BHP is the second-biggest company on the London Stock Exchange. \"The board believes that unification is in the best interest of shareholders.\" \"It will result in a corporate structure that is simpler and more efficient, reduces duplication and streamlines BHP's governance and internal processes,\" BHP said.  The company expects the corporate overhaul to be complete by the end of January, pending regulatory and shareholder approvals. As part of its corporate restructure, BHP is merging its oil and gas business with Woodside Petroleum. BHP shares increased 1.3 per cent to $40.23. Brent crude oil put on 1.8 per cent to $US70.94 a barrel, while spot gold rose 0.20 per cent to $US1772.45 an ounce at 4:20pm AEDT. US shares rallied, with aircraft maker Boeing surging after saying it had made progress in getting Chinese approval of its 737 MAX plane.  China's aviation authority has issued an airworthiness directive on the aircraft that will help pave the way for the 737 MAX's return to service in China after two and a half years.  China's aviation regulator was the first to ground the aircraft in 2019 after two deadly crashes. The market recovered ground lost yesterday, which saw a steep sell-off in the last hour of trade on worries about the Omicron variant of the coronavirus and the upcoming withdrawal of stimulus by the US central bank.  Value stocks, economically sensitive smaller stocks and transport firms did the best, with travel and hospitality stocks also bouncing back.   \"Obviously, there's concern about Omicron but there's a feeling that infections aren't as severe as initially thought,\" Oliver Pursche, from Wealthspire Advisors in New York, said. \"Second, economic data, particularly labour data, is coming out on the strong side.\" The Dow Jones index rose 1.8 per cent, or 618 points, to 34,640, the S&P 500 rose 1.4 per cent, to 4,577, while the Nasdaq Composite rose 0.8 per cent, to 15,381.  New claims for unemployment benefits increased less than expected last week and lay-offs fell to the lowest level in more than 28 years.  Claims rose by 28,000 to a seasonally adjusted 222,000 for the ending November 27.  They dropped in the week before to 194,000, the lowest since 1969. That probably indicates people have found work in a tight labour market or exhausted their benefits. A US Chamber of Commerce survey showed many Americans who lost their jobs during the pandemic had not returned to work. There were 10.4 million job openings at the end of September. The total number of people receiving unemployment benefits was 2.31 million in mid-November. Investors will now turn to the latest official US unemployment figures, which are out tonight.  Economists expect non-farm payrolls to have increased by 550,000 jobs last month, while the unemployment rate is expected to have fallen from 4.6 per cent to 4.5 per cent.  European shares lost ground as countries ramped up restrictions to curb the spread of the Omicron variant.  The FTSE 100 in London fell 0.6 per cent, to 7,129, the DAX in Germany fell 1.4 per cent, to 15,263, and the CAC 40 in Paris fell 1.3 per cent, to 6,796. Oil prices are higher, with Brent Crude up 1.9 per cent, to $US70.17 a barrel, while spot gold has fallen 0.8 per cent, to $US1,767.79 an ounce. OPEC and other major oil producers maintained their regular oil production increase of 400,000 barrels a day at a meeting overnight. "}, "/news/2021-12-03/didi-withdraws-from-nyse-amid-ccp-control-of-tech-industries/100672750": {"description": "Ride-sharing service Didi withdraws from New York Stock Exchange amid Chinese control of tech industries", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Chinese ride-sharing service Didi Global says it will pull out of the New York Stock Exchange and shift its listing to Hong Kong as the ruling Communist Party tightens control over tech industries. Didi's one-sentence announcement gave no explanation but share prices of Didi and other tech companies including e-commerce giant Alibaba Group have sunk after they were hit by data-security and anti-monopoly crackdowns. Regulators said in July they would step up scrutiny of Chinese tech companies with shares traded on foreign exchanges. Entrepreneurs who are largely shut out of the state-run financial system have raised billions of dollars abroad. But Beijing is tightening control over that and promising to give them more ways to raise money in China. \"After conscientious research, the company will start delisting operations on the New York Stock Exchange immediately and commence preparations to list in Hong Kong,\" Didi said on its social media account. Hong Kong is Chinese territory but has a separate regulatory system that allows foreigners to invest in its stock market. Mainland markets are mostly off-limits to foreign capital. Didi Chuxing, headquartered in Beijing, raised about $4.4 billion ($6.2 billion) in its June 30 market debut. Its share price tumbled 25 per cent after the government announced it was investigating how Didi gathered and handled customer data. The company earlier denied a news report it planned to buy back its US shares. A \"red flag steering wheel\" inside the ride-hailing service app now identifies drivers who are members of the Communist Party. The ruling party sees information gathered about China's public and economy by e-commerce, social media and other private companies as a valuable asset and a security risk. China's cyberspace regulator said earlier it found \"serious violations\" in how Didi collected and stored personal information. It said the company was to \"rectify problems\" but gave no details. Didi was later ordered to remove 25 of its apps from online stores. Chinese companies have been selling shares abroad for two decades but regulators have yet to say whether the financial structures they use comply with rules that ban foreign ownership of internet companies and limit access to other industries. The ruling party also is trying to capture more of the value of tech industries for the Chinese public by encouraging companies to sell shares on domestic markets. Shares in a handful of mainland companies traded in Hong Kong can be bought by Chinese investors through mainland exchanges. Meanwhile, a stock exchange set up to serve entrepreneurs started trading on November 15 in Beijing.  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/satellites-are-challenging-australias-coal-mining-industry/100663676": {"description": "'Carbon footprint of a medium-sized European country': What satellites found over one part of Australia", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Inside a shared workspace for technology start-ups in south-west London, Christian Lelong has a bird's-eye view of some of the dirtiest secrets of Australia's mining industry. Using satellite imagery from the European Space Agency combined with meteorological data and atmospheric models, Mr Lelong, the director of natural resources at geospatial analytics firm Kayrros, has been able to measure methane leaks from the fossil fuel industry around the world. What he has found above Queensland's coal-rich Bowen Basin raises serious questions about whether Australia has been accurately reporting its greenhouse gas emissions to international bodies. \"We found that emissions for all the 50-odd mines in that basin in total add up to about 1.5 million tonnes of methane per year,\" Mr Lelong told the ABC. According to federal government figures for the same period, only a third of that amount of methane was reported in the area. If accurate, Kayrros's data portrays an extraordinary picture of the potential impact Australia's coal industry is having on the Earth's atmosphere. \"These numbers [in the Bowen Basin] are the equivalent of the total carbon footprint of a medium-sized European country like Austria or the Czech Republic,\" Mr Lelong said. for around 30 per cent of global warming to date Typically, methane leaks occur from coal mines, oil and gas wells and natural gas pipelines. Reducing these leaks helps buy the planet time to get other greenhouse gas emissions under control and is one of the easiest ways to reduce emissions. At the global climate change summit COP26 did not sign the agreement Mr Lelong knows the Australian mining industry well He worked for BHP for seven years before joining Goldman Sachs as a commodities analyst. Now he wants to help the Australian energy sector reduce its methane emissions. He has approached the federal government through the Department of Energy and offered to share his company's knowledge and expertise. That offer has not been taken up. Greens environment spokeswoman Sarah Hanson-Young met with Mr Lelong at COP26 in Glasgow and cannot understand why Australian officials are not jumping at the chance to use the technology. \"The Prime Minister says that they want a technology solution to climate change,\" Senator Hanson-Young said. \"Well, here we have incredible data satellite technology. \"We could pinpoint exactly where these leaks of pollution are happening and hold the companies accountable if he was just willing to listen.” When the ABC approached Energy Minister Angus Taylor for comment, his office referred the matter to the Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources. A spokesperson for the department said: \"The Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources is developing a National Greenhouse Account Methane Monitoring System using Sentinel data to assess the implications of methane releases for the preparation of Australia's next National Greenhouse Accounts and is not looking for data analytic services from London.\" The spokesperson also said that \"the department believes, like the IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change], that it is premature to use the satellite data to quantify emissions directly\". Mr Lelong disputed that and said that view was expressed in the IPCC's 2019 report before it had evaluated modern satellites. Australia snubs one of the key global actions to come out of the UN climate change conference by bowing out of an international pledge to reduce methane emissions. \"Now we have a new generation of satellites, it changes everything,\" he said. \"They are much more accurate and precise.\" However, the Department of Energy insists the Kayrros data \"has not yet been well-verified by ground stations or more targeted studies\" and that its approach \"lacks transparency ... and would not be acceptable under the Paris Agreement\". That has not stopped the UN's new International Methane Emissions Observatory from working with Kayrros. It told the ABC it was collaborating with the company and planned to use its tools and analytics in the coming months. published this week by a group of Dutch scientists It analysed data from satellite imagery of six coal mines in the Bowen Basin and found they were emitting much more methane than would be expected from what Australia is reporting. Ilse Aben, who was the lead researcher on the paper, told the ABC that by studying emissions from the Hail Creek mine, run by Glencore, you could see that the figures did not add up. \"For Hail Creek, which is a surface mine, we found that it's actually responsible for roughly 20 per cent of the methane emissions, as reported by Australia for the total of all coal mines,\" she said. \"It is one surface mine and there are 73 surface mines in Australia. “If this one mine already gives a 20 per cent contribution, then it is unlikely that the total is right.\" A spokesperson for Glencore said in a statement: \"It is not credible that a single open cut coal operation is responsible for 20 per cent of the industry's total annual methane emissions.\" \"Glencore reports emissions in accordance with the Australian National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting (NGERS) regulatory measurement criteria.  \"The emissions from our Bowen Basin operations are accounted for in Glencore’s robust climate change targets. These targets include a 15 per cent reduction in total (including Scope 3) emissions by 2026; a 50 per cent reduction in total emissions by 2035 and an ambition to be a net zero total emissions company by 2050.\" Bryce Kelly from the University of NSW, who has led research teams mapping emissions from coal mines, said the Dutch study had undergone extensive peer review. \"There is merit in the results,\" Dr Kelly said. \"Kayrros's independent studies further support that there are methane anomalies above what would be expected for the region based on reported emissions. \"We now need ground and airborne studies to verify the satellite observations.\"  Professor Aben said that while she had not seen Kayrros's results, they had found the emissions from six mines in the area were two times higher than was reported by the mining companies. \"So I'm not totally surprised … it's certainly not contradicting each other,\" she said. Currently, the data relied on by the federal government for its Greenhouse Gas Inventory is provided by mining companies which can then be subject to auditing and review. The ABC asked BHP and Anglo American, two of the largest coal miners in the area, how they measured methane levels in the Bowen Basin. Neither company provided details. In a statement, a spokesperson for Anglo American said: \"We have invested significantly in methane capture infrastructure, generating enough electricity to power 90,000 Queensland homes every year, and reducing our emissions by about 5 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent per annum.\" \"We are actively working on technology solutions to further reduce methane emissions in our underground metallurgical coal mines as part of our commitment to operate carbon-neutral mines by 2040.\" A spokesperson for BHP said: \"BHP Mitsubishi Alliance estimates and publicly reports emissions from its Australian operations in accordance with the rigorous requirements of the National Greenhouse and Energy Act.\" Senator Hanson-Young questioned whether industry figures supplied to the government were accurate. \"This is just more of how the Morrison government behaves with the fossil fuel industry, hand-in-glove dismiss the independent advice, dismiss the independent data and take the data and the word of the fossil fuel industry,\" she said. \"I know who I believe.\""}, "/news/2021-12-03/labor-announces-2030-emissions-reductions-target/100671512": {"description": "Labor announces 2030 emissions reductions target  ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Federal Labor is committing to cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 43 per cent by 2030, if it wins government at the next election. It is slightly lower than the 45 per cent target the party took to the last election, but higher than the Coalition's longstanding target of 26 to 28 per cent. Leader Anthony Albanese, in releasing Labor's plan, insisted the plan would create more than 600,000 new jobs, cut power prices by $275 a year per household by 2025, boost private investment and cost the government $683 million.  He said the plan came with the \"most comprehensive modelling\" ever undertaken by an opposition. \"Australian business is leading. It's time that the Australian government caught up,\" Mr Albanese said. \"That's why our plan to create jobs, cut power bills, boost renewables and reduce emissions is the right plan for Australia.\" Mr Albanese said Labor would tighten the Coalition's safeguard mechanism, brought in under former prime minister Tony Abbott. That mechanism allows certain companies a threshold of emissions. If they go above that, they must purchase carbon offsets, but if they fall below the threshold they can sell their credits.  Labor is proposing to gradually lower that threshold until Australia reaches net zero emissions. The Labor plan includes a commitment for three quarters of the Commonwealth's fleet of vehicles to be electric by 2025. That comes in addition to an earlier commitment to help make electric vehicles cheaper and expanding recharge stations across the nation. The party had already pledged to upgrade the electricity grid, install community batteries, boost skills and invest in green metals. The Coalition is projecting Australia's emissions will have fallen by as much as 35 per cent by 2030, but will not commit to reaching that. The government has attributed the jump in forecast emissions reductions, in part, to the rapid uptake of household solar energy and other renewables. Despite setting a higher emissions reduction target than the Coalition, Labor's target is still below what environmentalists want Australia to achieve. Prime Minister Scott Morrison dismissed Labor's new target, arguing he expected the opposition would ultimately pursue an even higher target. \"This is the starting bid from Labor. It's not the final outcome,\" he said. \"And if they have to get into that option with the Greens to form government, it won't be 43, that will be the opening bid and it's going to end a lot higher than that.\" Mr Albanese said the Coalition would \"lie about this policy\". \"We don't pretend that it's a radical policy,\" he said. \"It is a consistent policy with out approach. It will do the right thing and the right outcome on jobs and lowering energy prices.\" Both Labor and the government have committed to reaching net zero emissions by 2050, but the government has been criticised for hanging its plan to get there on technologies that do not exist yet. The government has committed to reaching net zero by 2050, and says it is on track to beat its 2030 emissions targets. But what will it take to turn Australia green? In October, the government announced it would commit to the target after weeks of bitter debate within the Coalition which saw some Nationals MPs say they would never support the policy. At the time, Mr Albanese criticised the government's plan, saying it contained no new policies to reach net zero. \"Scott Morrison left it to the last-possible minute to outline a scam that leaves everything to the last-possible minute,\" he said. \"The word plan doesn't constitute a plan, no matter how often [Mr Morrison] said it. \"As always, with this Prime Minister, it is all about marketing.\" To reach net zero, the government plans to invest more than $20 billion in \"low emissions technologies\" like carbon capture and storage (CCS) and soil carbon sequestration, which sees removed from the atmosphere and stored in the soil. The pace of emission cuts and the level of support for industry to transition are set to be key issues at the federal election next year."}, "/news/rural/2021-12-03/wooden-pallet-shortage-looms-/100661738": {"description": "Supplies of toilet paper no problem, timber pallets to transport them another story", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A national shortage of wooden pallets could threaten the supermarket supply chain in the lead up to Christmas. The country's largest timber pallet manufacturer, Dormit, owned by Pentarch at Dandenong South in Melbourne produces 70,000 pallets each month, which are used to move stock for the major supermarkets. But the Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union said the mill was running out of logs and was winding down production.  CFMEU national secretary, Michael O'Connor said the Australian Food and Grocery Council has warned unions and the Victorian Government that supermarkets could face a critical shortage of household goods, toilet paper, alcohol and other supplies in the lead up to Christmas if more timber was not released. \"This is developing into a perfect storm ahead of Christmas: Job losses, a slow-down in manufacturing, and potential critical supermarket shortages,\" Mr O'Connor said. Mr O'Connor said there was a dire shortage of timber available due to the Victorian Government's decision to end native logging by 2030.  \"The Victorian Premier needs to act urgently to get pallet production back up and running in Victoria, so the problems impacting pallet supply nationally aren’t being made worse by a log supply crisis here,\" Mr O'Connor said. In South Australia, Mount Gambier-based sawmill NF McDonnell & Sons supplies timber to pallet manufacturers. CEO Craig Nisbet said while the Christmas period was traditionally a busy time, this year he was expecting demand for pallet timber to outstrip production.  \"These problems are likely to be only worse in the future,\" Mr Nisbet said. \"It's one thing to say how do we produce more pallets for Christmas this year, but if this approach continues it could be Christmas for the next ten years.\"   Mr Nisbet said it was imperative the industry worked out the supply-demand imbalance.  The ABC reveals alarming evidence that forests aren’t always being grown back after they've been logged in Victoria.. \"If you take the Victorian example the government policies around native forestry probably aren't consistent with what industry would say is sustainable forestry,\" he said.  \"Without [native forestry] we really need more trees in the ground and more investment in processing on a domestic front.\"  Victorian Nationals Leader Peter Walsh told the Victorian Country Hour the pallet shortage was already having an impact on agriculture.  \"I have had a number of fruit growers in my electorate raising severe concerns that they can't get enough pallets to ship their products now,\" Mr Walsh said. \"If there is not enough pallets going to CUB [Carlton United Breweries] that impacts on the distribution of beer and if there is not enough pallets going to Mars Confectionary that impacts the distribution of chocolates — probably two things that are consumed in large quantities over the Christmas New Year break.\" In a statement, a spokeswoman for the Victorian Government said the worldwide shortage of pallets and other timber products was due to a number of factors including trade issues, bushfires and the coronavirus pandemic. The government spokeswoman said current litigation against the state logging company Vicforests was also placing additional strain on the availability of timber in Victoria. Dormit has been contacted for comment."}, "/news/2021-12-02/the-hardware-that-can-cost-you-thousands/100666628": {"description": "The $35 hardware in your home that could cost you $14,000", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " As the weather turns sticky and warm and beaches beckon for summer holidays, it's the season to check your taps or risk tens of thousands of dollars' worth of water damage. Since January 2018, insurance company RACQ has received 9651 claims for water damage to homes, with burst pipes and hoses connected to dishwashers and taps a common cause of those claims. Spokeswoman Kirsty Clinton said the average cost of flexi hose related claims rings in at $14,145. \"We often see a rise in these incidents over the festive season when people go away for holidays,\" she said. Master Plumbers Association of Queensland technical services manager Ernie Kretschmer told ABC Radio Brisbane the hoses were in most modern homes and could \"burst at any time if they are damaged.\" It's pretty much impossible to check everything about a property during a half-hour inspection. Here's what to keep an eye out for at your next open home visit. He said incorrect installation and corrosive chemicals stored under the sink could shorten the lifespan of the hoses – which are a rubber tube wrapped in braided steel. \"If you liken it to a hernia, once that outer wall is compromised, the inner tube can herniate out and burst,\" he said. \"Then you've got the full bore of the pipe delivering water under your kitchen sink or in the basement or behind your toilet and that will continue to run until you isolate it,\" he said. The reason for rise in claims over the festive season is that no-one is home to turn off the water mains when those pipes burst — so switch off your water mains when you go away. Ms Clinton said flexi hoses started to deteriorate after ten years and home owners should check whether they have one installed in their homes and if they were nearing expiry. \"The damage caused can be extreme, with water flooding your house in a matter of seconds, leading to ruined cabinets, walls, floors, and mould which, in some extreme cases, can make your home uninhabitable,\" she said. \"The other important factor on top of the costs to consider is the distress and inconvenience that incidents of this nature can cause individuals and families, where treasured possessions can be ruined, and homes can even be uninhabitable for periods of time.\" Mr Kretschmer said home owners or renters could \"poke [their] head under the sink and have a look\" for damage on the hose – like kinks, stains, rust marks, or fraying. \"If you do have any concerns or if you do pick up some damage or some kinks or something like that, you would have to call a plumber.\" Some flexi hoses can retail at major hardware stores for as little as $35 but Ms Clinton said cheap DIY flexi hoses, which were not rated for the pressure or heat, were a growing concern for the RACQ. Mr Kretschmer warned home owners against doing any plumbing themselves. \"Where you might have issues with your insurance is if we're looking at a DIY situation where the home owner has gone to a hardware and done some plumbing themselves,\" he said. \"Now, that's illegal.\""}, "/news/2021-12-02/america-indian-ceo-twitter-parag-agrawal-twitter-diversity/100667392": {"description": "Twitter is the latest American corporate to appoint an Indian CEO but Australia keeps hitting a 'bamboo ceiling'", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Tesla boss Elon Musk summed it up nicely when he tweeted in reaction to the latest Indian-American, Parag Agrawal, being appointed chief executive of a technology giant — this time at Twitter.  Jack Dorsey announced he was stepping down Mr Musk was responding to Patrick Collison, the CEO of financial services and software company Stripe, who was among many on Twitter pointing out that Indian-born Agrawal is part of a growing list of CEOs of Indian origin heading tech giants with billion-dollar-plus market caps including (but not limited to) Google, Microsoft, Adobe, IBM and Palo Alto Networks. Replying to this tweet, the billionaire and SpaceX founder said: \"USA benefits greatly from Indian talent!\" According to Bloomberg, at 37 years of age, Mr Agrawal is the youngest person to run a company in the S&P 500.    Twitter — $35.1b — Parag Agrawal Google (Alphabet) — $1.89t — Sundar Pichai Microsoft — $2.48b — Satya Nadella Adobe — $318.7b — Shantanu Narayen IBM — $105b — Arvind Krishna Palo Alto Networks — $54b — Nikesh Arora Mr Agrawal has been involved in the company's crypto and blockchain teams. Commentators say the appointment as top boss signals that the company will continue to focus on blockchain and decentralised technologies.  $39 billion takeover bid of buy-now-pay-later platform Afterpay Mr Agrawal earned a bachelor's degree in computer science and engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology and a PhD in computer science from Stanford University. Before joining Twitter, he had worked at Microsoft, Yahoo and US telecoms giant AT&T in various research roles. According to American media reports, as Twitter CEO, he will receive an annual salary of $US1 million ($1.4 million) and will also be eligible for an annual performance bonus worth as much as 150 per cent of his salary, meaning he could take home up to another $US2.5 million per year. Mr Agrawal has also been granted a stock award worth $US12.5 million, which will vest in 16 equal quarterly increments beginning February 1, 2022. Women across corporate Australia want to see an end to ridiculous excuses like, \"There's no point promoting you. You're just going to run off and get pregnant\". Shortly after he was announced as Mr Dorsey's successor, some Twitter users highlighted a 2010 tweet of his, quoting a Daily Show joke about how treating all Muslims as terrorists was akin to treating all white people as racists. His appointment as Twitter's CEO comes at a time when the social media giant and several governments around the world, including India's, have been at odds over free speech and fake news on the platform. Upon his appointment, Mr Agrawal tweeted saying: \"The world is watching us right now, even more than they have before. It's because they care about Twitter and our future, and it's a signal that the work we do here matters.\" In Australia, it is rare for top publicly listed company CEOs to come from culturally diverse backgrounds. Some examples include Macquarie Group chief executive Shemara Wikramanayake, Stockland's managing director and CEO Tarun Gupta, Orica's managing director and CEO Sanjeev Gandhi, Link Group CEO Vivek Bhatia, Pact's managing director and CEO Sanjay Dayal, Newcrest's managing director and CEO Sandeep Biswas, and Cleanaway, which until January had Vik Bansal as its CEO.  But as a recent report examining diversity in corporate Australia noted: \"The Australian boardroom is still very much the product of our Anglo and European heritages.\" The 2021 Board Diversity Index, by Watermark Search International and Governance Institute of Australia, looked at 300 organisations and more than 2,000 board seats, examining five types of diversity — gender, cultural background, skills, age, and tenure and independence. It found that 90 per cent of directors were still of Anglo-Celtic or European background. \"There is some evidence that Asian representation is growing but there remains a substantial opportunity to better reflect the importance of the Asian market and the changing complexion of Australia's population,\" the report stated. According to Diversity Council of Australia chair Ming Long, the other issue is that when there is a rare culturally diverse appointment, often it's still a man over a woman. \"It's still coming out that gender is the most prominent piece of your identity when it comes to decisions of who to appoint as CEO,\" Ms Long told ABC News. \"That's why role models become really important for other people to come through, but also for people making decisions about who is appointed to those roles, to see what's possible.\" Ms Long says Australia is starting to pay attention to cultural diversity, but is still far behind the United States. \"Australia has a pipeline [of culturally diverse talent] — but they hit the bamboo ceiling and we do not see them [being appointed] as leaders of organisations.\" Ms Long says DCA did research recently that found \"you can't lift cultural diversity programs from the US …. because the heritage is different.\" \"In Australia, we're still trying to overcome the heritage of White Australia Policy that's been passed down through organisations and feelings that people from ethnic communities are not seen as leaders. \"They graduate through Australia, work in corporate Australia, but then hit a ceiling and cannot get past it.\" She says she hopes that more boardrooms in Australia will follow Silicon Valley in recognising Indians and other Asian nations as places to access rich pools of talent. Sheba Nandkeolyar, founder of MultiConnexions Group, and past national chair of the Australia India Business Council, says Australia is yet to embrace global trends of taping into global talent. \"Australia is yet to discover the talent that's sitting right around their nose,\" she says reflecting on the makeup of corporate Australia, especially in the technology world. \"I personally feel that Australia has been far removed as a continent and has very little understanding of the cultures of other countries and the talent that exists in these other countries.\" She qualified that statement by then saying many Australian's do not know what IIT [Indian Institute of Technology] and IIM [Indian Institute of Management] are, noting that these Indian education institutions have produced a number of CEOs that now head the top American tech companies. \"We [Australia] can tap on this talent and make our companies grow into world-class companies,\" Ms Nandkeolyar says."}, "/news/2021-12-02/policy-failures-caused-the-historical-decline-in-economic-growth/100664322": {"description": "Australia has just seen the results of a real-life experiment into the cost of policy failures", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " One of the striking things about this era of Australian politics is how we've all  It hasn't been theoretical. What was the cost of the federal government's failure to procure vaccines more quickly? What was the cost of the New South Wales government's failure to contain the Delta variant? We've just lived it. Those two things combined in the middle of this year, leading to the third-largest quarterly decline in Australia's economic activity in a 60-year period. You can see the damage in the numbers. The three lockdown states were hit badly. New South Wales suffered the biggest fall in state final demand, followed by Victoria and the ACT. There was a strong lift in growth across the rest of Australia (WA, SA, QLD, NT and Tas), but the hit to the lockdown states was so large it was overwhelming. Which makes sense, given NSW and Victoria account for more than half of Australia's economic output. It saw the national economy contract by 1.9 per cent overall. It was the third-largest quarterly decline on record, following the declines in activity in the June quarter 2020 (-6.8 per cent) and the June quarter 1974 (-2 per cent).  Could it have been worse? Economists say Victoria's result was really surprising, because it \"only\" contracted by 1.4 per cent. NSW had restrictions in place for the entire September quarter (July, August and September), and Victoria went into lockdown on August 6. Sydney's lockdowns are causing huge economic damage, and there are lessons to be learned from it, writes Gareth Hutchens.  But even accounting for that head-start, the economic damage in NSW was far more pronounced than in Victoria. \"Household consumption contracted by 10.8 per cent in NSW and only 5.2 per cent in Victoria,\" noted Westpac's chief economist Bill Evans. \"Even more stark is the comparison on private business investment where NSW contracted by 7.1 per cent while investment actually expanded by 5.8 per cent in Victoria (led by a 21.7 per cent increase in non-dwelling construction, largely driven by renewables).\" The ABS also noted that last point, saying Victoria's increased investment in renewable energy projects in the quarter was significant. Meanwhile, construction activity in NSW was hit particularly hard. The state suffered a 13.9 per cent decline in machinery and equipment investment. It saw a 10.3 per cent decline in non-dwelling construction, due to falls in new engineering construction and new buildings, thanks to the lockdowns.  It saw a 5 per cent fall in total dwellings, driven by weakness in houses and other residential dwellings, again due to the lockdowns. At any rate, the lockdowns on the east coast took their toll on important household spending categories nationally, too: They were only partly offset by spending increases in other categories: In August, Reserve Bank governor Philip Lowe encouraged everyone to get vaccinated. and the faster we could open the economy back up And economists are now hopeful for the coming year. Now that Australia has some of the highest vaccination levels in the world, we're less likely to need damaging lockdowns again. And the unusually-high level of accumulated savings in the economy will help to drive significant consumption growth over the next 12 months. In the September quarter, the household saving ratio jumped from 11.8 per cent to 19.8 per cent, thanks to government stimulus payments and peoples' inability to  \"As long as we do not return to extensive lockdowns we can expect household spending to drive extraordinary growth over the course of 2022,\" Mr Evans said. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said those billions of dollars in accumulated savings should be spent across the economy as restrictions are eased further. \"There is good news for our economy, in that the lockdowns are behind us,\" Mr Frydenberg said on Wednesday. \"There will be challenges ahead, but with vaccination rates here in Australia having risen to be among the highest in the world, we can, and we must, live with the virus and its variants. \"With world-leading health and economic outcomes Australians have put themselves in a very strong, and indeed the best possible, position going into 2022,\" he said. Although, much will still depend on the state of the global economy next year."}, "/news/2021-12-04/criminal-charges-could-be-laid-for-those-handling-guns-on-set-of/100674318": {"description": "Rust film set death could result in charges, says New Mexico district attorney", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Some people on the Rust film set who were handling prop guns may face criminal charges over the fatal shooting of a cinematographer. On Friday, New Mexico district attorney Mary Carmack-Altwies said a decision to lay charges had not been made but noted they may come when the investigation comes to an end. Cinematographer Halyna Hutchins was killed in October during a rehearsal of the western film Rust, starring Alec Baldwin. The prop gun fired while in the hands of Baldwin, killing Ms Hutchins and injuring director Joel Souza. In a statement released on Friday, Ms Carmack-Altwies said everyone involved \"in the handling and use of firearms on the set had a duty to behave in a manner such that the safety of others was protected\". Once the investigation is complete \"certain individuals may be criminally culpable for his/her actions and/or inactions on the set of Rust,\" she added. Ms Carmack-Altwies gave no indication when the investigation might conclude. Her statement followed a television interview on Thursday by Baldwin, who said he did not believe he was responsible for Hutchins's death and that he did not think he would be criminally charged. In an emotional television interview that has aired in the US, actor Alec Baldwin says he assumed the gun he was holding when Halyna Hutchins was shot was empty of live bullets and he did not see any safety issues on the set before the incident. The actor had reportedly been told by a crew member that the gun was safe. \"I feel someone is responsible for what happened, but I know it isn't me,\" Baldwin told US ABC television's George Stephanopoulos. \"I might have killed myself if I thought I was responsible, and I don't say that lightly. \"I've been told by people in the know … that it is highly unlikely I would be charged with anything criminally.\" Baldwin said that as an actor he was not responsible for checking the gun, or what it was loaded with. He also said he did not pull the trigger but the revolver fired as he cocked the gun while practising a shot. \"I let go of the hammer of the gun and it goes off,\" he said. Authorities in Santa Fe, New Mexico, have been focusing their attention on how live bullets found their way onto the set. An attorney for armourer Hannah Gutierrez, who was in charge of weapons, has said she checked the gun before it was handed to Baldwin by assistant director Dave Halls, who shouted that it was \"cold\" or safe.  "}, "/news/2021-12-04/regional-cinema-closures-covid-netflix-streaming/100630936": {"description": "Have COVID-19 and streaming services killed the small-town cinema? ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Small town cinemas across North Queensland are shutting up shop, crippled by the COVID-19 pandemic, film distribution deals and the online streaming boom. In Ingham, an hour and a half north of Townsville, the town's only picture theatre has screened its last movie after decades of operation. Manager Germaine Sheahan said the announcement came as a \"shock\". \"We knew things were starting to go badly and I had it in the back of my head, but just never wanted to hear that,\" she said. The Australian box office made more than $400 million in 2020 – a dramatic revenue drop of more than 67 per cent. Despite a loyal following, the Ingham Picture Theatre could not recover from COVID-19. \"When cinemas did open up, it was very, very slow to get our customer base back, because they were used to not coming to the cinema anymore,\" Ms Sheahan said. \"Movies weren't coming out as regularly, the big blockbusters … that's when we really struggled.\" The cinema was the only movie theatre between Townsville and Babinda, meaning local customers will now have to travel long distances visit the nearest big screen. \"It's a big loss for a small town,\" Ms Sheahan said. The fate of the Ingham cinema is a sign of a growing trend. In the North Queensland town of Charters Towers, the council has made the decision to only screen movies on school holidays. \"We're finding that there's a lot of weeks, months, between the major holiday events where it's nearly dead empty,\" Mayor Frank Beveridge said. \"We're going to save hundreds of thousands of dollars just by tweaking those hours.\" Cr Beveridge said streaming services like Netflix had eaten away at the demand for small-town cinemas. \"I think you'll find there's been a conga line of theatres closing down across regional Queensland,\" he said. The Ingham Picture Theatre has been operated by Ingham Disability Support Services since 2013. Chief executive Elizabeth Sutton said the non-profit organisation had been losing an average of $70,000 a year keeping the cinema afloat. \"The year of 2020 was horrendous,\" Ms Sutton said. She said minimum guarantees, where film distribution companies demand a flat fee regardless of ticket sales, had taken a huge toll. The small cinema was also required to screen new releases several times a day. \"We're paying $300 for a week and sometimes only getting four people to come and see a movie,\" Ms Sutton said. \"You're losing money hand over fist and you can't keep doing that. \"If there was a lot more flexibility in terms of when production houses allowed us to show or how much they charged, we would end up probably breaking even or making some sort of profit.\" Tess Van Hemert from the Queensland University of Technology's Digital Media Research Centre said the cinema industry was already showing signs of distress before COVID-19. She has been investigating how movie theatres can survive in a post-pandemic digital age, where streaming services have made the market more competitive. \"The cinemas that tend to be the most successful at retaining their audience have a very clear, distinct identity and a very strong connection with their local community,\" Dr Van Hemert said. \"They often have very strong connection with their audience through social media and they're very strategic about the films that they're programming.\" In Ingham, the Hinchinbrook Shire Council is exploring sustainable ways to revive the big screen. Options like Friday and Saturday night screenings and school holiday programming are on the table. Ms Sutton said young people and seniors would be hit the hardest by the closure. \"It's just one of those things that you're not going to have in your childhood anymore and I think it's really sad,\" she said. \"You can't see Fast and Furious on your TV at home — it doesn't work, it's not the same.\""}, "/news/rural/2021-12-04/once-in-a-generation-season-wa-farmers/100672030": {"description": "WA farmers celebrate 'once-in-a-generation season' with good news trifecta", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The West Australian grain production industry is experiencing a once-in-a-generation harvest with many growers enjoying the trinity of good yields, quality and prices. A record 21 million tonnes of wheat, canola and other cereals valued at $8 billion is set to be harvested in the coming weeks.  Kulin agronomist Ben Whisson described the year as a season like no other.  \"This year we have finally hit the holy grail — fantastic yields, great grain, pricing — everything that we would want in that regard,\" he said.  \"I feel like I am going out on a bit of a limb here but I think it is probably a once-in-a-generation season.\" Brothers Mark and John Flannagan farm a 26,000ha wheat and chemical fallow operation at Pindar, 140 kilometres east of Geraldton. At the halfway point of his current harvest, Mark Flannagan said this season had been one of his best ever. \"It's an unbelievable season, it really is,\" he said. \"We're sitting anywhere between 3 and 4 [tonnes per hectare]. We look at 2 tonnes as good, 2.5 is exceptional, 3 tonnes is off the scale,\" he said. \"We've effectively had two seasons here in one, we'll be looking to push a lot of marketing through to July next year just to insulate us, these years you deliver a lot of grain, it's a lot of dollars but the COVID tax man will be out.\" The grain flowing into header boxes and field bins is currently worth a lot more than an average season.  Wheat is fetching cash contracts between $400 and $450 a tonne and at times this year canola has cracked the $1,000 per tonne mark — prices close to double those offered at the same time last year.  Andrew Fowler is one of WA's most substantial broadacre farmers, cropping 34,000 hectares east of Esperance with a team of 50 staff this harvest. He took on an additional lease property at the start of the year and in order to spread his risk he locked in grain prices when they were not as high as current cash offers. \"Most of us are selling our crops over an extended period of time and the average is what's important,\" Mr Fowler said. \"Personally we did sell a reasonable amount with a six in front of it and we are going to be coming along with a very good average but it's going to be closer to 800 [dollars per tonne]. \"We're probably going to need all of that to get ourselves ready for a much higher cost structure next year with the way fertiliser pricing is looking. I think we just need to get the crop off and sit down and plan carefully.\" As with every season, some districts do well while others struggle.  In southern parts of the state, the season has delivered too much rain with waterlogging affecting 10 per cent of crops in the Albany zone.  At Green Range, 70km north-east of Albany, mixed farmer Jeremy Walker's crops have drowned in too much standing water.  He has decided to make the most of the problem, installing a centre pivot irrigation system to grow fodder for livestock next year.  \"I'm trying to find a way for water to make me happy rather than sad,\" Mr Walker said. \"We've already planned to drop the cropping percentage by a fair bit. The sheep are that safety net for us.\" Frosts have also taken a toll on some individual farmers with yield losses of up to 50 per cent or more of what it could have been. Andrew Dunne farms at Beacon, just over 300km north-east of Perth. He had some frost at his place and so did his brother. \"Some of his crops that were going to be his best ever and overnight a couple of hours of cold weather has changed his whole year,\" Mr Dunne said.  Attention has already turned to next season, which is likely to be characterised by record-high input costs, particularly with skyrocketing fertiliser and chemical prices. Farmers such as David Eliott from Watheroo in the Wheatbelt have baulked at paying twice the usual price for fertiliser. He expected to reduce next year's seeding program in favour of more sheep.  \"Some of the input prices are making us a little reticent to commit to a huge year,\" Mr Eliott said.   \"We have got the flexibility to increase the livestock a little bit on the home farm and that is the option we decided to go down.\" "}, "/news/2021-12-04/woodside-new-gas-australia/100644556": {"description": "As Woodside's latest gas project cops climate condemnation, others say it's a global reality check", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " While Woodside moves to develop what some have labelled Australia's last big gas project, others predict the insatiable demand for energy in Asia will ensure the gas industry is a long way from dead. analysts say it's likely it will be the last project of its kind in Australia. But Curtin University energy economist Roberto F Aguilera says that rather than Scarborough signalling the end of new gas developments, the project demonstrates that even in the face of intense pressure from public sentiment and political criticism, the demand for energy will continue to drive new gas developments. \"The development of this very large project will secure their ability to provide LNG for decades to come,\" Dr Aguilera said. \"I think this buys the company a bit more time to really properly evaluate their next project — Browse.\" Woodside's Browse gas project has a long history of not getting up, with bitter fights with environmentalists at James Price Point, and then failed bids to use floating LNG facilities or epic undersea pipelines to the North West Shelf. But Dr Aguilera says despite the current popular sentiments condemning the future of gas, the day may still come when Browse becomes another new gas development. \"These are very capital intensive projects so they're not overly influenced by current events,\" he said. \"[The] long-term strategy will be asking, 'Will there be long-term demand for LNG, particularly in Asia?\" Woodside risks becoming the pariah of the coming decades as they are inexorably tied to multi-billion-dollar LNG plants that must have gas. Woodside's Scarborough project has found itself thrust to the front line in the war against fossil fuels by conservationists and those concerned about rising emissions. The Scarborough development will keep Woodside's Pluto LNG facility in production for years to come, Dr Aguilera said, but the neighbouring North West Shelf LNG facility, also operated by Woodside, was going to need more gas to keep the $34 billion investment in production. \"Longer term they will be needing new gas reserves and production to satisfy those LNG projects,\" he said. \"It's probably wishful thinking to get out of natural gas because they've invested so many billions in this very capital-intensive, long-life infrastructure.\" The forces building to prevent future gas developments cannot be ignored by companies like Woodside, and are coming from multiple directions including banks, energy customers and the general public. While making LNG carbon neutral looks to be a major challenge, according to Dr Aguilera, making some progress on improving its climate credentials is more realistic for Woodside than the impossible task of getting out of gas altogether. \"The company will have to make the case that gas and LNG is compatible with a low-carbon future,\" he said. \"By using renewables like solar to power the gas developments, like the liquefaction, for example, which is energy intensive … all of this will help them to obtain that social licence to be able to proceed with future gas or LNG projects like Browse.\"  Martin Pritchard, director of Broome conservation group Environs Kimberley, has fought against Woodside's plans to develop new gas projects in the past, and he says people power will ensure Scarborough is Australia's last big gas project. \"It has to be the last one, it shouldn't even be the last one, but it must be the last one if it does go ahead,\" he said. \"Places in the Kimberley will become uninhabitable by the end of the century if we continue to push out emissions.\" He said that growing concerns about high temperatures, severe storms, and extreme droughts meant that while governments and industry might struggle to see a future without gas, the public would not tolerate future gas developments. \"People are going to start to get so fed up with it that there is going to be a very significant backlash against any new, large-scale fossil-fuel projects,\" Mr Pritchard said. \"The fossil-fuel game is over, and what we're seeing now is the last gasp of the industry, trying to get the last drops out of the ground before it completely shuts down.\" Dr Aguilera agrees the industry has a serious public perception problem but that there are more chapters still to play out in the story of global reliance on fossil fuels. \"Maybe two to three years ago gas became deeply unpopular,\" Dr Aguilera said. \"But longer term I think it will be realised that achieving climate goals is very, very difficult in the absence of using gas as a transition fuel.\""}, "/news/2021-12-04/what-happens-to-broken-election-promises-warrnambool-trains/100653318": {"description": "What happens when an election promise is broken in regional Victoria? ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " In the lead-up to the 2018 state election, the Victorian premier Daniel Andrews came to Warrnambool promising a faster, more frequent rail service.  An upgraded Warrnambool line was part of the state government's re-election campaign, with the $114 million upgrade a key part of the government's $1.57 billion regional upgrade package.  The upgrade, announced mid-2017, was big news for the south-west Victorian city. Once completed, it would enable a fifth daily service to the city from Melbourne and pave the way for VLocity trains to travel to Warrnambool for the first time, cutting travel times by up to 20 minutes. At the time of the announcement, Mr Andrews told local media \"we've been stuck for a while\" and that he expected the upgrade to take up to 18 months to complete. Fast forward four-and-a-half years, a little under half of which has been hampered by the impacts of a global pandemic, the project has yet to complete its first stage of construction. Warrnambool remains without a fifth daily train service, and the new VLocity trains are a pipedream, with a recent parliamentary committee revealing new trains for the line are yet to be ordered. It's been 1,598 days since the announcement was made in Warrnambool. Like many regional people, Warrnambool man Harvey Thulborn-McCorkell relies on public transport to get around. The lack of services has already shaped his life. Mr Thulborn-McCorkell, who uses a wheelchair, says he can't attend his first-choice university due to a lack of available train services. And just getting aboard a train can be a struggle, with the older stock that runs in Warrnambool not always accessible for people with mobility difficulties.  His mother, Kylie Thulborn, is a disability advocate.  She says she's sick of the inequality that regional Victorians suffer when it comes to transport.  \"I feel extremely frustrated, and devastated,\" Ms Thulborn said.  \"This ongoing saga relating to the rolling stock and to accessible public transport really has stagnated to a point where no-one understands what exactly the new rolling stock is going to look like, or if there'll be accessibility on the line, or even an additional service.\" The state opposition has slammed the government for its inaction. Nationals shadow public transport minister Steph Ryan said Labor lied to voters.  The government did not respond to a request for an interview or respond to specific questions, instead heaping pressure on the Nationals at a federal level.  \"Regional Victorians would remember the Liberal Nationals record when it comes to regional rail  “In contrast, we're working with the Deputy Prime Minister to deliver building important regional rail upgrades, and the Andrews Labor government is increasing passenger services and delivering newer, better trains for regional Victorians.\" On Friday, the state government announced that Tricia Malowney would take on the role of Victoria's chief accessibility advocate, a new position designed to help improve accessibility across the Victorian transport network.  According to official websites, the state government remains committed to its upgrade promise, with Upgrade Stage 1 still \"in progress\".  Signal upgrades have commenced, level-crossings are being upgraded and work on a crossing loop at Boorcan, which helps trains pass and recover from \"unexpected delays\", has commenced.  That work is expected to be finished by mid-to-late next year, with construction on Stage 2 of the upgrade  The Public Transport Users Association criticised the government's decision to promise the upgrades ahead of the last election, saying they were never going to be completed by 2021, like was promised at the time.  Liberal Surf Coast Member Roma Britnell said the new trains needed to be ready to roll by 2023 when federal government-funded upgrades are also due to be completed.  But Kylie Thulborn says she's already sick of waiting.  \"Regionally we've been consistently disadvantaged over a long period of time,\" she said.  \"We've listened and been patient and waited to have not only an accessible infrastructure, but also a timetable that allows us to move towards more metropolitan areas. \"It's something that transparency has been lacking from, and it's something that many, many people have put a lot of energy into, so to have no recourse is just super frustrating.\" The state government has yet to confirm when the upgrade will be completed, however buses are currently replacing trains on the line, with a construction blitz underway until December 12. "}, "/news/2021-12-03/friday-finance-with-elysse-morgan/13661810": {"description": "Friday Finance with Elysse Morgan", "article_category": "business", "article_text": ""}, "/news/2021-12-03/national-film-and-sound-archive-to-digitise/13661806": {"description": "National Film and Sound Archive to digitise footage at risk of being lost", "article_category": "business", "article_text": ""}, "/news/2021-12-03/new-data-suggests-australia-could-be-underreporting-methane/13660496": {"description": "New data suggests Australia could be underreporting methane gas emissions from coal mines", "article_category": "business", "article_text": ""}, "/news/2021-12-03/fiji-opens-its-borders-to-tourists-as-covid-19-variant-emerges/13660448": {"description": "Fiji opens its borders to tourists as COVID-19 new variant emerges", "article_category": "business", "article_text": ""}, "/news/2021-12-02/thursday-finance-with-alan-kohler/13659838": {"description": "Thursday Finance with Alan Kohler", "article_category": "business", "article_text": ""}, "/news/2021-12-02/people-living-with-a-disability-facing-housing/13659732": {"description": "People living with a disability facing housing affordability hurdles", "article_category": "business", "article_text": ""}, "/news/2021-12-04/grand-final-rematch-to-kick-off-footy-festival-for-afl-round-one/100674336": {"description": "Victorian 'footy festival' expected to draw hundreds of thousands for AFL season launch", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " A \"footy festival\" that is expected to bring hundreds of thousands of fans to Melbourne CBD and regional centres will kick off the 2022 AFL season. A Wednesday night grand final rematch will launch the AFL men's competition, with the 10 Victorian AFL teams to play five matches across five days in March. The Bulldogs will take on the Demons at the MCG on March 16, after Melbourne's drought-breaking win in Perth this year. The Demons will have a chance to unfurl their premiership flag at the historical home of the grand final ahead of the game. The game will be the first of five games in the state across five days, with all 10 Victorian men's teams participating in the festival. The AFL said it would be the first time since round 20 of the 2016 season that all 10 Victorian teams would play in the state for the same round. All 14 AFLW teams will play their round 10 matches in Victoria as part of the event. It will include matches in Geelong and Ballarat, which are expected to drive tourism in the regional cities. The 2021 AFL and AFLW seasons were heavily disrupted by COVID-19 outbreaks, lockdowns and border closures. Minister for Tourism, Sport and Major Events Martin Pakula said Victorians were keen to get back to attending sports events. \"We saw it with the Flemington [racing] carnival, we'll see it in a few weeks with the Boxing Day Test and then the Australian Open,\" he said. \"But footy holds a special place in the hearts of Victorians. \"The fact that every Victorian supporter will get a chance to see their team play live is a really great reward for what has been a difficult couple of years.\" AFL chief executive Gillon McLachlan said the Wednesday night grand final rematch was not likely to be a permanent fixture. \"I feel it's a huge way to start the season and then we'll have a look at it but it's not a plan to do it more regularly,\" he said. \"It's just a one-off thing to I guess showcase the grand final teams after a unique couple of years.\" McLachlan said it was too early to say whether the recent emergence of the Omicron COVID-19 variant would have any impact on crowd numbers."}, "/news/2021-12-03/chris-cairns-spinal-stroke-heart-health-issues/100673916": {"description": "New Zealand's Chris Cairns not sure he will walk again after spinal stroke", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Former New Zealand all-rounder Chris Cairns is not sure he will walk again, but says he is lucky to be alive after suffering a spinal stroke following life-saving treatment for a torn artery in August. The stroke left the 51-year-old paralysed from the waist down. \"I don't know if I'll ever walk again and I have made my peace with that,\" Cairns told the Daily Telegraph. \"It's now about understanding I can lead a full and enjoyable life in a wheelchair but at the same time knowing it will be different.\" suffered a heart attack in August that resulted in an aortic dissection He was rushed into emergency surgery. Melanie Cairns says her husband, New Zealand cricket legend Chris, has undergone further cardiovascular surgery in hospital in Sydney after collapsing. Cairns played 62 tests, 215 one-day internationals and two Twenty20 matches for New Zealand between 1989-2006. After retiring from international cricket, he was accused of involvement in match fixing in India while captaining the Chandigarh Lions in the defunct Indian Cricket League in 2008. He denied wrongdoing and fought several legal battles to clear his name, winning a libel case against former Indian Premier League chairman Lalit Modi in 2012. In 2015, Cairns was cleared of perjury in relation to the libel case after being charged by Britain's Crown Prosecution Service, where two of his former team mates, Brendon McCullum and Lou Vincent, testified against him. Cairns said his brush with death had given him a chance to rebuild relationships. \"There have been relationships which … have fractured that have been reignited on the back of a new perspective on life. It is almost like everybody has moved on, which has been heart-warming,\" he said. \"It was good of Brendon to wish me well. There is no direct contact between us but the fact he did that was very decent of him.\"  "}, "/news/2021-12-04/aflw-fixture-full-of-compromises-and-surprises/100672112": {"description": "The 2022 AFLW fixture is full of compromises and surprises", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " At Marvel Stadium to launch the 2022 fixture, Nicole Livingstone was flanked by two of the most recognisable faces of AFLW: Melbourne's Daisy Pearce and the Western Bulldogs' Ellie Blackburn. The casual observer would have been forgiven for assuming that the two pioneering clubs of women's football had been given the honour of opening the upcoming season. Instead, as was revealed by AFL media on Wednesday that season 2022 will be kicked off by St Kilda and Richmond — two teams who did not make finals in 2021. Perhaps more bizarrely, the season opener will be held at Frankston Oval — a far cry from the now-traditional venue of Princes Park in Carlton. Frankston Oval has a capacity of approximately 8000, with just 1000 seats, and is approximately an hour and a half on public transport from Melbourne's city centre. When quizzed about the unusual choice, the head of women's football said a key consideration had been the inability of either Princes Park or Moorabbin Oval to host night games, with both undergoing renovations with the support of federal and state governments. \"Obviously we have IKON [Princes] Park that's going through a redevelopment where the lights were not available for a Friday night match,\" said Livingstone. \"Frankston Oval has fantastic lights, some of the best lights going around. So to be able to play a night match in Frankston in Bayside on a beautifully renovated deck, I think the players will actually like playing there. \"What's great for the game is we have so many venues that are being re-developed. We're talking about tens of millions of dollars being put into facilities across not only Victoria but the nation, for the betterment of women's football.\" Missing from Livingstone's answer, however, was an acknowledgement that Whitten Oval — while also undergoing renovations — is capable of hosting night matches. Indeed, the Bulldogs and Demons will square off in Footscray just one night after, at a ground that has traditionally drawn large crowds to AFLW games. But in a sign that the AFL is moving away from appealing to its more 'rusted-on' AFLW supporters, Livingstone added that the suburban opener was being pitched at families on holidays in the region. \"[Frankston Oval] a beautiful venue and it's just a stone's throw away from the Mornington Peninsula. \"[The upcoming AFLW season] is in school holidays, so we feel really confident that it's going to attract a lot of people.\" The awkward timing of the upcoming AFLW season — immediately after the Christmas/New Year period — is another reason why the AFL was limited in its search for a venue for the opener. The upcoming season was originally slated to begin in December 2021, but was shifted to January 2022 due to ongoing uncertainty around state border closures. As a result — and after years of insistence that the competition be given \"clean-air\" — it now sits squarely in a jam-packed sporting calendar featuring the Australian Open, men's and women's Ashes series, A-League W and M, and the WNBL/NBL, among others. This is another clear break in tradition from the AFL hierarchy, which had previously expressed a lack of confidence that AFLW would hold its own if forced to compete against other summer sports. \"It is a very busy sporting calendar in that January period,\" said Livingstone. \"But what I would say is that we continue to hear from everybody how much they love women's football. \"So either watch us or turn up to games. We want to see you, the players want to see you, moving forward.\" Western Australian sides fans will be able to see the Dockers and Eagles in action for the first three rounds of the season in what Livingstone said was a decision reached in negotiation with the players and WA government. Subsequently, both teams will head to Victoria for a string of matches, before the AFL is confident they will be able to return without onerous quarantine requirements. As was the case when GWS players were required to stay in a \"bubble\" last season, Livingstone added the AFL had committed to providing players with an undisclosed form of compensation to recognise the impact on their lives outside of football. Looking ahead to the future of the competition — which in its following season will introduce all 18 clubs — Livingstone said that some time around December had been ear-marked as an ideal time to start the season. \"Potentially if the season grows longer, we could go a little earlier [than December]. That's a definitely a very good window that we've seen other sports try and stake a claim into as well.\" The length of the season — which next year will run for 10 weeks followed by three weeks of finals — has long been a point of contention for the AFLW playing cohort. AFLW players who excel in the role of winger — such as Kaitlyn Ashmore and Steph Chiocci — are becoming increasingly valuable, bringing out the best in inside midfielders, writes Gemma Bastiani. Bulldogs' captain Ellie Blackburn, while expressing excitement about 18 teams joining the competition for the following season, reinforced the players' desire to see a full-length season. \"As a player, we're definitely pushing [for a full season], so hopefully, we can put up a fight for that,\" she said. \"We know it's in the pipeline, and that's the long-term goal of the competition; we understand the growth side of things and we've got to work our way to that. But yes, from a players' perspective, we're pretty keen to play everyone once.\" The season’s length and starting time will be just some of the many issues to be ironed out moving forward, especially in the context of the looming CBA negotiations.  The current deal has one year left to run, with the previous round of negotiations playing out acrimoniously in the media.  Asked about whether there were plans for AFLW players to become “full-time”, Livingstone gave a hint as to the AFL’s thinking: “We’ve got to negotiate that obviously, between the AFL and AFLPA, but what I will say is that my language is different to full-time. My language is year-round. “So at the moment we have players with a contract for six months of the year. And I know the players would like to be year-round to be able to be the best footballers they can be.  “That doesn’t mean, you know, training 10 or 12 times a week at a football club. But I’m sure the players would like to be year-round to be able to get stronger in the off-season and have conditioning done. “So that’s certainly something that’s up for discussion in the next CBA.”"}, "/news/2021-12-04/ticketless-england-fans-endanger-lives-2020-euro-championships-/100674032": {"description": "England's 'day of shame': Ticketless England fans endangered lives at 2020 final, report finds", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Football Association (FA) CEO Mark Bullingham has apologised to fans for what he labelled the \"terrible experience\" during the European Championship final between England and Italy at Wembley, after an independent review said it was a near miss when it came to potential fatalities. \"The FA apologises for the terrible experience that many suffered within Wembley on what should have been a historic night for the game,\" Mr Bullingham said. The July final, which Italy won on penalties, was marred by clashes between supporters and officials in and around the famous stadium. The review found around 2,000 ticketless supporters stormed into Wembley on July 11 after 17 \"mass breaches\" of the stadium gates. Many fans forced their way through disabled access entrances by punching and kicking stewards, before England lost to Italy in the country's first final of a major men's tournament since winning the 1966 World Cup. The review said aggression by England fans was an \"embarrassing\" part of the national culture that endangered lives. It also recommended fans be barred from stadiums if they chant abuse or are under the influence of drugs or alcohol. \"The behaviour of a large minority of England supporters was not just disgraceful, it recklessly endangered lives,\" review author Louise Casey said in a 129-page report published Friday. \"The appalling behaviour of supporters on Euro Sunday should be a wake-up call for us all. \"For too long, the actions of a minority of England fans have been tolerated as a part of our national culture (albeit an embarrassing one), rather than confronted head-on.” The review said that if England won the game, a ticketless group of 6,000 people were preparing to storm the stadium to see the trophy presented. Ms Casey blamed the rampage on a collective failure and said she did not want to scapegoat anyone. “A minority of England supporters turned what should have been a day of national pride into a day of shame,” Ms Casey said. Ms Casey recommended the English Football Association lead a campaign to bring about a “sea-change in attitudes” by fans. About 100,000 fans gathered around the north London stadium for the match, despite pandemic curbs capping the 90,000-seat Wembley's capacity at 67,000. “The threats, aggression, violence, smoke and flare use, throwing of missiles - including faeces — excessive consumption of alcohol and cocaine all combined to fuel a febrile atmosphere,” Ms Casey said. A number of ticketless football fans attempt to break into Wembley Stadium ahead of the Euro 2020 final between England and Italy. \"A loss of experienced stewards as a result of the pandemic left Wembley’s stewarding operation vulnerable when confronted with the most aggressive and disorderly crowd Wembley had ever seen.\" Ms Casey condemned fans who she said targeted disabled supporters in a predatory fashion, to gain entry. \"In one appalling incident, a ticketless fan tried to impersonate a steward and hijack a disabled child and separated him from his father, in order to trick his way through a pass gate.\" A lack of enforced alcohol bans on London's public transport was highlighted in the report.  “The FA and Wembley, working with others, should step up action on eradicating such behaviours from football ... refusing to allow entry to fans who arrive chanting foul abuse and/ or are clearly under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs,” she said. UEFA has already punished England, with a home Nations League game in June being played in an empty stadium. A second empty-stadium game was deferred for a two-year probationary period. “The review makes clear that the circumstances leading up to the match led to a perfect storm of lawlessness,\" Mr Bullingham said in a statement. “No event is set up to deal with such disgraceful behaviour from thousands of ticketless fans. Collectively we must never allow this to happen again.”"}, "/news/2021-12-04/wnbl-season-audition-for-fiba-basketball-world-cup-2022/100660630": {"description": "WNBL set to light up with World Cup on the horizon", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The 42nd season of the Women's National Basketball League tips off today, live and free on ABC TV. Much has happened since the Southside Flyers were crowned champions in a North Queensland hub 12 months ago. It's been a big and dramatic year for Australian women's hoops, with the Opals recording their lowest result in an Olympic Games since 1984, the controversial withdrawal of star Liz Cambage on the eve of the Tokyo campaign, then in September a team of untried young guns claiming a bronze medal at the FIBA Asia Cup. After last year's condensed six-week hub due to COVID-19, the WNBL reverts to a full home-and-away season and best of semi and grand final series. It's again a marathon, not a sprint. Championship fancy Perth Lynx won't suit up until January because of Western Australia border restrictions. Imports return to the competition and the class of #WNBL22 might just be the best crop of international talent yet. In a way the season, which spans until April, is one big talent show ahead of next year's home FIBA Women's World Cup in Sydney. Ahead of the Asia Cup, Opals coach Sandy Brondello, upon picking a squad of more than 30, said she was opening the national squad up with an eye to the 2022 tournament. The Asia Cup team, led by Opals assistant coach and University of Canberra Capitals coach Paul Goriss, featured nine debutants out of 11 team members. Players can and will force their way into the national team on the back of dominant WNBL form. Performances will pay off. Southside Flyers and Bendigo Spirit launch the season and are the two all-Aussie teams opting not to fill their two available import spots this season. The reigning champs have lost Cambage, grand final MVP Leilani Mitchell (Bendigo), Steph Blicavs (pregnancy), Bec Pizzey (Sydney) and Monique Conti (AFLW), but have recruited strongly, bringing league MVP Abby Bishop back to Australia and adding rising star Maddy Rocci (UC Capitals), Kate Gaze (Townsville) and Asia Cup bronze medallist Kristy Wallace. The Spirit failed to win a game in the hub but got busy as soon as free agency began, landing prized signing Mitchell plus Boomer Maddie Garrick, livewire Anneli Maley, Carly Boag (Sydney) and Townsville big Meg McKay. Melbourne Boomers are a tantalising prospect, with a star-studded starting five including Olympic trio Cayla George, Ezi Magbegor and Tess Madgen and imports Lindsay Allen, who is back for season number three, and Indiana Fever star Tiffany Mitchell, who's shown some exciting glimpses in preseason games. Sydney Uni Flames have undergone a makeover and have a new coach in four-time Olympian Shane Heal. superstar daughter Shyla The Flames have recruited Keely Froling (UC Capitals) and Kalani Purcell (Melbourne) and boast some of the best young talent in the world with imports Stephanie Watts and Chelsea Dungee who, like Heal, were top 10 WNBA draft picks in 2021. Runner-up Townsville Fire might have lost Heal but will again be a contender under the superb guidance of reigning coach of the year Shannon Seebohm. They have a new home called The Fire Pit Triple championship player Micaela Cocks returns after having a baby last year. Monique Billings (Atlanta Dream) brings athleticism, height and scoring power, while fellow import Alecia \"Sug\" Sutton should excite the Fire's home crowds. The Capitals welcome back WNBL games record holder Kelly Wilson, who returns to the court after the arrival of her first child. The veteran point guard set the new record in her last WNBL game and is now five away from her 400th. The Caps have also provided the platform for ex-Opal Alex Bunton to emerge from retirement. Feeling good after a horrid run of knee surgeries, the centre has rediscovered her love of the sport after welcoming a daughter last year. Alicia Froling (Bendigo) and under-19 Australian representative Shaneice Swain get opportunities, while the Caps are excited about what their import, LA Sparks guard Brittney Sykes, can produce. Veteran Marianna Tolo is playing in France. Basketball fans have waited a long time to see Opal and WNBA player Alanna Smith play on home soil and she now makes her debut with the Adelaide Lightning. She'll play alongside former Stanford University teammate and import Kiana Williams, who also has links with Lightning captain and reigning league MVP Steph Talbot, suiting up together at Seattle this past WNBA season. The Lightning have also secured New York Liberty forward/centre Kylee Shook. Perth must wait a little longer for round 1 but there's plenty of excitement and expectation around the side and whether it can win just its second title. The Lynx landed the signature of 2019 WNBA number one draft pick and Tokyo Olympic gold medallist Jackie Young, who has the potential to dominate the league, and Dallas Wings guard Marina Mabrey. Rumours are rife that medal-winning Opal and WNBA champion Sami Whitcomb will return for Perth, while Lauren Scherf is primed for a solid season after arriving from the Flames and performing strongly at Asia Cup.    "}, "/news/2021-12-03/tasmania-jackjumpers-nbl-brisbane-bullets-hobart/100674044": {"description": "Tasmanian JackJumpers claim thrilling win over Brisbane Bullets in NBL debut ", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The Tasmania JackJumpers have scrapped their way to a dramatic nine-point overtime victory over the Brisbane Bullets in their NBL debut. The league's newest franchise held their nerve to claim and overtime 83-74 at Hobart's MyState Bank Arena as Brisbane star Nathan Sobey was ejected from the game in the dying stages. The Australian Boomers Olympic bronze medallist was called for an unsportsmanlike foul and launched a verbal tirade at officials as he left the court. Sobey had earlier been called for a technical foul and was given his marching orders with his side leading 73-71. The JackJumpers went on a 10-1 run in his absence to secure the victory in front of a 4738-strong sell-out crowd. \"We're trying to build something here that's special. What a way to start the season off,\" coach Scott Roth said. \"Our guys were very gritty and feisty. It wasn't pretty. We're not a sexy team but we are very competitive. They just found a way to win. \"In a game like this there was a tremendous amount of emotion. \"(But) I thought our guys for the most part were very level-headed and kept their composure throughout.\" Hobart-born Sam McDaniel and Jack McVeigh both nailed telling three-pointers late in overtime. The match was tied at 69-69 at the end of regulation time after Sobey sunk a three-point shot to level the scores with just 5.9 seconds on the clock. He finished with a game-high 24 points, with 16 of those coming in an outstanding first half. Tasmania's US import Josh Adams (20 points) found his range as the game progressed after a wayward opening, while countryman Josh Magette (19) made some important free throws in overtime. McDaniel, the JackJumpers inaugural signing whose father Wayne played six seasons with the Hobart Devils, fittingly scored the opening points. Tasmania opened up a 27-19 lead at the end of the first quarter on the back of six points from turnovers to Brisbane's nil. The Bullets mounted a comeback to reduce the margin to one at halftime, but the home side stayed the course to take a 56-53 lead into the final quarter. In a topsy-turvy final quarter, Brisbane were down 67-66 when Lamar Patterson missed both free throws with 14 seconds on the clock. Tasmania's Will Magnay then nailed two of his own before Sobey stepped up to send the match into overtime.  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/ashes-stuart-broad-ready-to-meet-david-warner-in-first-test/100673858": {"description": "Broad not expecting Warner to be his Ashes bunny on Australian soil", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " England fast bowler Stuart Broad is not expecting to enjoy the same dominance over David Warner this summer as he did during the 2019 men's Ashes series. Warner endured a horror Ashes experience in England two years ago, losing his wicket to Broad in seven out of 10 innings. He was dismissed for a duck by Broad in three consecutive innings and finished the series with a batting average of 9.50 in what was his return to Test cricket after being suspended following 2018's ball-tampering controversy.  Warner had no answer to Broad's angle and movement off the pitch in 2019. But Broad said he felt Warner would feel more comfortable on Australian pitches, where he averaged 63. \"I've got to take positives from what happened in England, but also realise it was a couple of years ago, conditions were different,\" Broad said. \"Davey will have worked on things as I will have worked on things. \"We might have slightly different field settings, attack from a different angle, but I'm realistic.\" The first men's Ashes Test begins at the Gabba next Wednesday. Brisbane's weather has improved in recent days, allowing Gabba ground staff to work on the pitch. But the heavy rain in the last week has left question marks about the preparedness of the surface. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. \"We could get anything,\" Broad said. \"If you get wet weather and the pitch is slightly underprepared, it changes things, you might go a bit fuller in length. \"The state games I've watched from the Gabba, it can nip around a bit. \"You don't often see that in a Test match, but you don't often see weather like we've seen over the past three weeks.\" England's intra-squad tour match continued at Brisbane's Ian Healy Oval on Friday. Ben Stokes — playing his first match since July after returning from a mental health break — scored a brisk 42 off 56 deliveries before retiring. Stokes took 2-31 with the ball on Thursday.  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/a-league-women-phoenix-draw-with-wanderers/100673828": {"description": "Phoenix draw in A-League Women debut against Wanderers", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Wellington Phoenix began life as an A-League Women's side in encouraging fashion as their young outfit battled to a 0-0 draw with Western Sydney Wanderers in the first game of the new season. After kick-off was delayed by 15 minutes due to thunderstorms in Wollongong, the Phoenix gave a good account of themselves in an end-to-end encounter. While the Phoenix — who had eight 18-year-olds in their starting side — failed to score, there were plenty of positives in their first outing against a much-fancied Wanderers team. Things could have been vastly different when the Wanderers' Bianca Gallic fed Sheridan Gallagher through the middle of the Phoenix defence in the 12th minute. The forward turned and bore down on goal but was only able to hit the crossbar from the edge of the box. After a season remembered more for bungles than brilliance, the new A-League Women's competition is hoping to start a new era, writes Samantha Lewis. That was to be the sole flashpoint in the first half as the Wanderers enjoyed the lion's share of possession but were unable to turn their dominance into goals. Their end product was lacking and when the Phoenix opted to press, the Wanderers often squandered possession or were forced to go long. The Phoenix were well organised and defended smartly in the opening 45 minutes, with Grace Jale the spark for the Gemma Lewis-coached side. They showed no signs of relenting during their spirited start as Zoe McMeeken's whipped cross just after the half-time break found Chloe Knott, who was unable to test Wanderers goalkeeper Sarah Langman. The Wanderers responded with Gallagher setting up Erica Halloway after some smart play at the byline, but Lily Alfeld was on hand to deny the forward. As the match wore on, the younger Phoenix outfit seemed to tire, with Jale taken off with 30 minutes left to play and McMeeken treated for cramp. Rosie Galea had a chance in the 85th minute to snatch a winner for the Wanderers but all she could do was fire her effort into the side netting. Wanderers coach Catherine Cannuli was booked in the dying stages of injury time for leaving her technical area and touching a live ball. A Holly McNamara stunner netted Melbourne City a 1-0 victory over Canberra United in the night's other A-League match. Cutting in from the left wing on the 80-minute mark, the City forward curled the ball around United goalkeeper Keeley Richards from just inside the penalty area. Until that point it had looked as if City might be denied a deserved victory after producing a string of chances in a dominant performance. In a 10-minute second-half blitz, Kiwi international Hannah Wilkinson had demanded three quality saves from Richards, notably a leaping effort to tip a long shot over the bar before another blast from close range again needed to be parried away. United could have opened their account as Margot Robinne put Grace Maher into space before her left-footed shot failed to stretch City custodian Melissa Barbieri on 73 minutes. After McNamara's goal, City looked to have found a second but Richards emerged from a goal-mouth scramble holding the ball. Late drama was avoided when United substitute Alexia Karrys-Stahl jumped high but could only head the ball to Barbieri. City coach Rado Vidosic said he began to fear the goal wasn't coming before McNamara stepped up to the plate. \"You always think like that, but we know that we will have a few goal-scorers this season,\" he said. \"Holly, she's only 18 years old, a great talent — and what a strike. Their goalkeeper made some fantastic saves and she kept them in the game.\"  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/bathurst-1000-jamie-whincup-misses-out-on-top-10-shootout/100673698": {"description": "Supercars legend misses out on Bathurst 1000 shootout", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Retiring Supercars legend Jamie Whincup will not take part in the Bathurst 1000 top-10 shootout on Saturday after a dramatic first qualifying session at Mount Panorama. Holden young gun Will Brown — who won his maiden Supercars race in Sydney last month — snatched provisional pole after pipping Anton De Pasquale (Ford) and Chaz Mostert (Holden) in qualifying. The top three all produced scorching best laps in a quick session on Friday. But Holden's Whincup will not take part in Saturday's top-10 shootout after finishing 11th, with Tim Slade knocking the four-time Bathurst 1000 winner out of contention in the dying stages. It is just the fourth time the seven-time Supercars champion has finished outside the top 10 in qualifying for the Bathurst 1000 during his glittering career. Jamie Whincup is aiming to conquer the Mount Panoroma Circuit for a fifth time to cap off a remarkable career behind the wheel. Sunday's race will be Whincup's farewell as a full-time driver before he moves into team management with Triple Eight. Whincup is again teamed up with fellow Supercars great Craig Lowndes, with the pair famously claiming a Bathurst 1000 three-peat between 2006 and 2008. \"It won't change our approach, we'll still continue to do what we do,\" Whincup said after Friday's qualifying session. \"We've got a quick race car so we'll see what Sunday throws at us.\" Whincup and fellow former winner David Reynolds (19th) were the only big names who failed to qualify for the 161-lap race inside the top 10. Brown has marked himself as a rising star in recent weeks and this will be his first Bathurst 1000 as the main driver.  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/nrl-wests-tigers-sign-api-koroisau-from-panthers-for-2023/100673546": {"description": "Wests Tigers sign Penrith Panthers premiership star", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Wests Tigers have landed a major recruitment coup, securing Penrith's premiership hooker Apisai Koroisau on a two-year deal from the 2023 NRL season. Koroisau — who made his State of Origin debut for NSW this season — agreed to terms with the Tigers on Friday, knocking back interest from the NRL's newest franchise, the Dolphins. He will stay with Penrith for the 2022 season. Koroisau is likely to play a key role in the Tigers' next chapter, which is largely being guided by their 2005 premiership coach Tim Sheens, who is on board as their director of football. The move to the Tigers will see Koroisau reunite with head coach Michael Maguire, under whom he made his NRL debut and won a premiership while at South Sydney in 2014. \"He (Koroisau) not only adds a further level of experience in a key position of the spine, but he has shown himself to be successful alongside Michael Maguire previously in his career,\" Sheens said in a Tigers statement. Koroisau has played 145 NRL matches across across three clubs — the Panthers, Sea Eagles and Rabbitohs. He is the latest member of Penrith's premiership-winning side to sign elsewhere after the grand final, following Paul Momirovski and Viliame Kikau. Momirovski has returned to the Sydney Roosters, while Kikau will link up with Canterbury in 2023. The Tigers have also signed Parramatta's Isaiah Papali'i for 2023, while they will welcome Jackson Hastings and Tyrone Peachey to the club for next year.  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/memphis-grizzlies-set-new-nba-record-win-okc-thunder/100672996": {"description": "Memphis Grizzlies set new NBA record in historic thumping of OKC Thunder ", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Australian Josh Giddey was a fortunate absentee as the Memphis Grizzlies beat his Oklahoma City Thunder by 73 points, setting a new record for margin of victory in the NBA. The 152-79 scoreline eclipsed the previous mark, which was Cleveland's 68-point win over Miami on December 17, 1991. \"Tonight is not necessarily who we are,\" Thunder coach Mark Daigneault said. \"I think we've definitely shown that from a competitive standpoint. This isn't indicative of who our team is.\" Memphis used 12 players and nine of them reached double figures in scoring, with Jaren Jackson Jr's 27 points leading the way for the Grizzlies. Memphis was without its best player, injured guard Ja Morant. It was 72-36 at half-time and the Grizzlies just kept adding to the lead, eventually pulling ahead by as many as 78 points. The Thunder flirted with being on the wrong end of the record last season, trailing Indiana by 67 points on May 1 before rallying — such as it was — to lose by merely 57 points, 152-95. This was worse. Historically worse. The Grizzlies set a franchise record for shooting, making 62.5 per cent of their shots. De'Anthony Melton scored 19 points, Santi Aldama scored 18 and John Konchar scored 17 for the Grizzlies, and none of those three players even started. \"Man, it feels great. It feels great to be in the history books, especially in front of our home crowd,\" Melton said. \"And we did it one through 15. Everybody contributed, everybody played hard and we all got to get in the game. So, it's always a blessing. \"We knew with [Morant] going down what we had to do. We had to step up.\" No Memphis starter played more than 21 minutes. Lu Dort led the Thunder with 15 points, and Oklahoma City shot only 33 per cent. It was 12-8 after five minutes. From there, there was no stopping Memphis. The Grizzlies outscored the Thunder by 15 points in each of the four quarters. It was the third straight game the Grizzlies have led from start to finish. The Thunder lost their eighth straight as they continued to play short-handed with a number of players unavailable, including leading scorer Shai Gilgeous-Alexander, who entered concussion protocol earlier in the day. Gilgeous-Alexander scored 39 points against the Rockets on Wednesday night but suffered a blow to the head late in the game. Australian point guard Josh Giddey, who averages 10.4 points and 5.5 assists, sat out with a non-COVID-19 illness, and the remaining players couldn't fill the void in Oklahoma City's offence. The Thunder had been competitive in their seven straight losses before Thursday night. Their largest margin of defeat was 13 points.  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/a-league-women-season-preview/100630854": {"description": "A-League Women's season promises fresh start for Australian women's game", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " It's almost half-time in Adelaide United's round-six match against Melbourne Victory in the 2020/21 W-League season. The score is 0-0. The first 38 minutes have been a tight, tense contest between two sides brimming with emerging local talent. The game pauses as Victory midfielder MelindaJ Barbieri sits in the grass, clasping at her ankles. The commentator, realising he has some time to fill, begins a thought about a particular combination of Adelaide players he's enjoyed watching so far. But before he's able to finish his sentence, his audio drops out. The video freezes too. A deep, long sigh spills out of living rooms across the country. These broadcast bungles were the norm last season. Stuttering streams, disappearing graphics, out-of-sync audio, sometimes dead silence. Any game that wasn't played at a major stadium with the accompanying higher-quality broadcast infrastructure brought with it a kind of resigned expectation that fans might not end up watching the entire game. A few weeks prior, it was a giant hexagon graphic that floated for several minutes in the middle of the screen during a game between Canberra and Melbourne City. The week after that, it was a complete blackout of audio, video, and graphics as Victory played Brisbane before the panicked broadcaster, Fox Sports, threw to a clumsy, male-dominated ad. But this week, well, this was \"Tuba Guy\" week. Instead of a simple frozen screen, what audiences around the world saw of Australia's top women's competition was the interior of a mysterious man's bedroom. The presence of a large tuba on a shelf in the background led to an explosion of memes and nicknames on social media. Tuba Guy was in our lives for almost 30 seconds, clicking away at his computer before the screen cut to black. This was the moment, more than any other, that encapsulated how far the W-League had fallen on the priority list of its main broadcast partner. Outraged statements from several major stakeholders, including the league itself, followed. It was also, as it turned out, the death rattle of Fox Sports' relationship with Australian professional football. A lot has happened since then, during the world's longest off-season. Most of it stems from the \"unbundling\" of the leagues from Football Australia late last year. In the intervening months since that fateful final campaign, the newly formed governing body, Australian Professional Leagues (APL), which is now owned and operated by the clubs themselves, has embarked on a rapid, holistic rejuvenation of the professional game. It began, thankfully, with the securing of a new broadcast partner: Channel 10 and Paramount+. Fans have already witnessed the impact in the early rounds of the A-League Men's season, as well as Matildas and Socceroos games, which have been delivered with the kind of glittering, tuba-free professional production standards now expected of top-flight sports competitions. In addition, the marketing heft of Channel 10 has seen unprecedented exposure of the leagues and its players through cross-network promotional spots such as The Project and Celebrity MasterChef, slick and engaging television advertisements aimed at younger markets and simulcast across social media platforms, and the promise of more football in free-to-air prime-time slots than ever before. The new broadcast partner has been accompanied by a leagues-wide rebrand, removing the separate \"A-League\" and \"W-League\" competition names and incorporating them under one umbrella: the A-Leagues. This shift in the game's vocabulary was presented by the APL as a symbolic gesture of equality, presenting the two competitions as two parts of the same whole. \"It's not men's football, it's not women's football, it's just football,\" goes their guiding motto. However, the real-world application of these competition names, which currently stand as \"Isuzu UTE A-League\" and \"A-League Women's\" across most of their platforms, remains awkward and confusing, particularly for new or casual fans tuning in for the first time. Beneath the surface, though, serious work has been done to improve the competitions themselves. A new five-year collective bargaining agreement between the leagues and the player's union (PFA) has been reached that ensures equal access to facilities, travel arrangements, accommodation, medical resources, and club staff for both senior competitions. It also incrementally increases the individual wages for players, as well as increasing the minimum spend clubs must make on their women's teams. More subtly, too, the A-League Women's competition seems to have settled with its new identity in the wider women's club landscape. As Europe and the United States continue to lead the way, the A-League Women's has recognised its role as a springboard for emerging players to enter the next stage in their careers. It no longer laments the loss of big-name players like Sam Kerr or Ellie Carpenter, but rather uses them as examples of what Australia's top women's league is, now, all about. Finally, the last major change ahead of the 2021/22 season is the long-awaited introduction of a 10th team, Wellington Phoenix — the first new team in the women's competition since Melbourne City six seasons ago. With the co-hosted 2023 Women's World Cup edging ever closer to Australian and New Zealand shores, allowing the Kiwis their first professional women's football team seemed, in many ways, a no-brainer. According to the APL, the introduction of Wellington will usher in a swathe of new women's teams over the next few years, with Central Coast Mariners and Western United next in line, ultimately leading to an extended home-and-away season as well as new parallel competitions such as a women's FFA Cup. And so, as the men's competition navigates yet another \"new dawn\" after several stumbling starts, the women's competition, you feel, can only improve after where it was stuck barely a year ago. As more resources are poured into the women's game, accompanied by greater publicity and a promising content-creation wing in the APL's own KeepUp platform, there is a growing feeling of optimism that this league — one of the longest-running in Australian women's sport — will finally reach the heights its true believers always believed it could, that it will have trumpets, not tubas, heralding a brand new era for the sport."}, "/news/2021-12-03/patty-mills-career-nba-season-kyrie-irving-ben-simmons/100649660": {"description": "How the absence of two NBA All Stars helped spark Patty Mills's career year", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Two Australian-born point guards have been selected first in the NBA draft in the past decade. But neither Ben Simmons nor Kyrie Irving have played a game this season. The 55th pick from the 2009 draft, however, has. Patty Mills is having one of the best years of his career in season number 13, while those two max-contract superstars sit on the sidelines. Patty Mills is setting franchise records for the Brooklyn Nets in the NBA but leading the Boomers to an Olympic medal has helped him to claim on of Australian sports' top honours. Simmons refuses to play for Philadelphia Meanwhile, Mills has been just what the epidemiologist ordered for the Nets. With Brooklyn top of the Eastern Conference with a 15-6 win-loss record, Mills is averaging career highs in points, three-pointers made, three-pointers attempted and three-point percentage, where his mark just under 50 per cent leads the league among players with at least three attempts per game. He kicked off the season with a 21-point performance on 7/7 shooting from deep He's had moments like this in the NBA, for a game or two, but never over months. And it's no coincidence that his move from San Antonio to Brooklyn has precipitated this procession of three-point precision. When Mills was drafted deep in the second and last round of the 2009 draft by Portland, the diminutive Aussie could've easily ended up in the NBL soon after. Don't get me wrong, he was good, but he was third or fourth on the depth chart at both guard spots. After playing less than four minutes per game in just 10 outings his rookie year, a couple of departures moved him up the ranks, and he proved his worth in a 64-game sophomore season, earning a contract with the San Antonio Spurs in free agency. The Spurs were four championships into a dynasty when Mills joined them, stepping into a team with the Big Three of Tim Duncan, Tony Parker and Manu Ginobili already established and future two-time finals MVP Kawhi Leonard having just been drafted. The Spurs went to the NBA finals in Mills's second season with them, but he played just two games for four points as they lost a heartbreaking seven-game series against Miami. Legendary coach Gregg Popovich used Mills's hectic style of play — full-court defence, constant-motion offence — in short bursts in his early seasons. And he spent so much time on the bench he became more famed for enthusiastic towel-waving than anything he did between the lines. But by the time San Antonio returned to face Miami again in the 2014 finals, the team had been reshaped around rapid passing and three-point shooting. helping to seal the title with 14 points By the time Mills left last off-season Three healthy contracts over a decade a clear vote of confidence from Popovich, one of the smartest minds the game has seen. Since the less star-studded Spurs took down LeBron James, Dwyane Wade and the Miami Heat with a tidal wave of threes, the game has only moved further and further outside the arc, and Mills is perfectly placed to capitalise. See, the Spurs are a system team. Duncan and Leonard were focal points during their primes, but Popovich, like Craig Bellamy or Bill Belichick, is one of those coaches who can win games with no-names by just plugging them into a system and getting them to focus on the one or two things they do best.     That 'next player up' mentality also means, no matter how well you play, your minutes or your points could be someone else's next time around if they've got the hot hand or they're the most open on the next play. It's how Mills was able to have those breakout finals games, but also the reason they were so rare for him. The Nets are different. With former MVPs Kevin Durant and James Harden on the court with him, Mills is free to do what he does best — shoot threes — with more regularity. He knows Durant and Harden are going to do the bulk of the work with ball in hand, and with the gravitational pull of those two future hall-of-famers sucking in defenders from all over the floor, Mills has a solar system's worth of space to get off his shot when the ball gets to him. He already has six 20-point performances in the first 21 games and, considering he's only had more than this three times in 12 completed seasons and he has a career high of nine in a season, it's fair to say this is a banner year for Patty. But it's not just circumstance that's helped him become more prolific. Between the heartbreak of 2013 and the triumph of 2014, Popovich challenged the man he jokingly, but perhaps unfairly, dubbed \"Fatty Mills\" to get in better shape if he wanted more minutes, and Mills delivered. An torturous off-season has paid off for Patty Mills after the Australian starred in San Antonio's NBA Championship win. These days, he's built like a marathon runner, able to keep up his frenetic pace for long stretches without losing efficiency or production. Alongside that has been the Kokatha, Naghiralgal, Dauareb-Meriam man's maturation into a cultural leader and the ultimate professional thanks in no small part to his time in San Antonio, where he created the NBA's first Indigenous Night. \"Just a true pro through and through. How he approaches his craft every day is inspiring to everybody,\" Durant said of Mills. Add to that he's got a coach in Steve Nash who was the Platonic ideal of a three-point shooting point guard until Stephen Curry came along. less immune-shielded Irving Australia's political class should be watching Patty Mills and taking notes, writes Russell Jackson. As we said earlier, Mills is a long-time Olympic performer and Aussies are familiar with his work, but this year's Tokyo Olympics were different for the most obvious reason — it ended with a medal. 42 massive points to beat Slovenia to the bronze medal sitting out the Olympics Now, Simmons or not, the Boomers were always going to be Patty's team, but a good performance from Simmons, showing off his impossible passing and impassable defence, would have done wonders for his standing in the league. Ben Simmons has made himself an outcast in Philadelphia, unwilling to commit to his team but unable to secure an exit. How did his promising NBA career devolve into this mess? Philly's wretched playoffs exit against Atlanta Meanwhile, Mills once again happily played the hand that was dealt to him, showing out in Tokyo against the world's best, securing a healthy contract in one of the biggest markets in the world and a cultural melting pot Mills is thrilled to be diving into. perhaps Australian of the Year All Aussies should be silently praying for strict biosecurity measures in New York City for at least the next few months."}, "/news/2021-12-02/aflw-wingers-become-more-important-kaitlyn-ashmore-steph-chiocci/100646198": {"description": "How AFLW teams are strategically utilising wingers in an evolving competition", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " In the AFLW, the wing has traditionally been seen as a stepping stone role for midfielders. It's almost a rite of passage: Develop more strength and one-on-one ability and you'll graduate to the centre circle. What is becoming more evident as the competition evolves, however, is that some teams are utilising their wingers to make best use of the ground's width and change angles in attack. This makes not only the players who excel in the role exceedingly valuable, but also brings the best out of clever inside midfielders who excel at recognising the connection with those outside runners. As this role develops and is used more efficiently by teams, the control of uncontested possessions has become a significant indicator of how a team is tracking. A clear turning point was during the 2020 season, where the competition averaged more uncontested possessions than it did contested possessions for the first time in its history, with the gap widening in the 2021 season. Average possessions have steadily increased across the five years of the AFLW competition, with the increase in uncontested possessions last year indicating that a clearer game style and outside ball use are being employed by more teams. Just the Melbourne Demons averaged more than 50 per cent uncontested possessions in the inaugural 2017 season. This has steadily turned, with just Fremantle, Gold Coast and Melbourne finding more contested ball in the 2021 season. Notably, North Melbourne has adopted a clear uncontested ball approach to their game style since entering the competition in 2019. Typically, if the Kangaroos are to win the uncontested possession count, they are more likely to win the match. Of their 24 games played since round one, 2019, just five games have bucked this trend. Therefore, it is no surprise that North Melbourne is one of the teams to make the best use of their wingers. The best wingers in the competition possess similar attributes: They are reliable endurance athletes who are able to read the play well but, above all, they are patient. Typically, the most effective wingers transition from a half-forward role and possess an attacking mindset, focused on gaining territory and getting the ball inside the forward 50. Much of what a winger does in-game can go unnoticed, given the way the game is broadcast, as well the heavy focus on disposal numbers, but the most important aspect of the wing role is the restraint to stay outside of the contest, rather than dive in. In five years since its beginnings, the AFLW has become a game-changer — now all 18 teams will have a chance to compete, but there are still challenges ahead for the league, clubs, and players, writes Kate O'Halloran. Maintaining space to provide an outlet at contested situations is vital, which means the best wingers in the competition are the most disciplined players. For most footy players, the natural instinct is to hunt the ball but, when assigned to the wing, players must fight that instinct and, instead, trust that their inside midfielders will win the ball and feed it out to them. This is another key part of the role: There needs to be chemistry between inside midfielders and those outside runners. Ball-winning midfielders need to be aware of, and make use of, their wingers sitting outside the contest. Otherwise all that patience and positioning is wasted on a midfield group that looks to just win the ball and kick quickly and desperately out of the contest. In the 2021 season, there were two players regularly lining up in the traditional wing position who stood above the rest, thanks to a combination of their willingness to stick to the role, and their midfield's awareness of them as an outlet. They were North Melbourne's Kaitlyn Ashmore, and Collingwood co-captain Steph Chiocci. Working in tandem with an elite midfield comprised of Brianna Davey, Brittany Bonnici and Jaimee Lambert, Chiocci has developed in the wing role since the AFLW's inception in 2017. As in the first image above, Chiocci covers a lot of ground to always be within a handball of stoppages. Wingers often commit to a lot of unrewarded running, and are typically the first player cut out of frame when broadcasters zoom in on a contest.  Across her five seasons in the competition, just 34.1 per cent of Chiocci's average possessions are contested, and she averages two score involvements at 2.2 inside 50s a game. In 2021, Chiocci averaged a career-high 199.2 metres gained each match. Ashmore has developed in a different manner since 2017. Largely running off the half-forward line in her two years at Brisbane, her move to North Melbourne in 2019 saw her regularly stationed higher up the field. As in the screenshot above, Ashmore is one of the most disciplined and patient players in the wing position, always lurking around the stoppage and ready to use her run once the ball comes her way. After spending the 2020 season in the forward pocket, netting nine goals, Ashmore returned to the wing in 2021 and averaged a career-best 233.5 metres gained per game, with 66.7 per cent of her average possessions uncontested. In 2022, Chloe Dalton will return to the competition after a year of inactivity. Young players such as Eagle Mikayla Bowen, Lion Sophie Conway and Demon Casey Sherriff are all developing in wing roles, complementing strong midfield groups.  More than ever, outside running will be a true highlight of the coming season as teams find the value of the ground's width in transition and become more settled in their game structures and plans. Expect to see more heated one-on-one winger battles, as we did in the 2021 qualifying final between Collingwood and North Melbourne, where Chiocci and Ashmore went head to head, parallel to the play. Chiocci and Ashmore lined up on one another for much of their Qualifying Final battle this year and, while Chiocci's Magpies got the win, Ashmore arguably won the head-to-head.  Once you zoom out and see the way sides are structuring up outside of the close quarters of a stoppage, it becomes clearer that the best teams are taking on more nuanced and strategic approaches to the AFLW.    "}, "/news/2021-12-01/matildas-magic-will-be-in-the-timing-after-1-1-draw-with-usa/100663780": {"description": "Clare Wheeler proves timing is key in Matildas' draw with USA", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Isn't football, in the end, all about the timing? Matildas midfielder Clare Wheeler had barely been on the pitch three minutes, thrown into the lumbering final stages of Australia's second friendly against the USA in Newcastle on Tuesday, when she made what turned out to be a game-changing — and possibly career-defining — tackle. Seeing American midfielder Ashley Sanchez about to gallop away to start yet another piercing counterattack, Wheeler made what a colleague described as a \"high-risk, high-reward\" decision. The fringe Matilda, realising she only had a few minutes to impress head coach Tony Gustavsson before his selection of Australia's squad for January's Asian Cup, took the gamble. She didn't throw her right leg in front of the escaping Sanchez, so much as guide it, cupping the ball under her turned in-step, before using the momentum of the rain-slicked turf to curl the ball beneath her leg and prop herself back up in a single, graceful movement. A half-second extra either side and Sanchez's leg would have been taken out and a card drawn, or Wheeler would have missed the ball entirely. But she didn't. It was timed and choreographed to perfection. It was ballet on grass. It was also the moment that, ultimately, turned the game. Following the tackle, Wheeler fed the ball to an exhausted Steph Catley, who clipped a cross in for Sam Kerr to control and lay off for the coiling Kyah Simon. Simon, seething at having missed a sitter in the first friendly on Saturday, lashed at the ball, which deflected off the leg of USA defender Becky Sauerbrunn and flew into the back of the net. \"Sometimes that isn't credited enough,\" a relieved Gustavsson said of Wheeler's efforts afterwards. \"You see the goal-scorer — and obviously it was brilliant that Kyah stepped back and scored because she missed that chance [in game one] — but the key to that goal is Clare Wheeler's tackle. \"We said we need to be more physical, win our fight plan – our one-on-one duels – and Clare was the game changer that came in with that mindset. And without that tackle, we wouldn't have scored so huge credit to her.\" It begs the question, then: Why didn't she come on sooner? The Matildas have faced heavy criticism under Gustavsson for their defensive frailties, which were on display again on Tuesday after conceding to the USA in the fourth minute, but there are also growing questions over the depth and flexibility of the team's midfield. Matildas' \"dress-rehearsal\" against USA was as much a test for Tony Gustavsson as for his players. The retirement of veteran Aivi Luik after the Tokyo Olympics, and a long-term injury to Elise Kellond-Knight have left a gaping hole in the defensive midfield position. It is a position as necessary as it is under-appreciated: the omnipresent, metronomic central player who is often the glue that holds the forward and back lines together. Since the Olympics, Gustavsson has plugged the gap with two capable midfielders in Emily Van Egmond and Kyra Cooney-Cross. But these are two players whose careers to date have been built on their attacking qualities: Van Egmond's vision to find space and unlock defences with key passes, Cooney-Cross's shooting technique and frightening acceleration when moving forward with the ball. While difficulty and doubt may hang over the Matildas now, it is only over time that they will see the benefit of the current moment, after Brazil clawed their way back from 2-0 down to secure a draw on Tuesday night.  Against the USA on Tuesday night, both midfielders were part of the starting XI, with Van Egmond playing the deeper-lying role. However, perhaps also through a combination of fatigue and the energy-sapping humidity of Newcastle, the midfield looked at times tired and disjointed. Passes didn't connect, support triangles were too slow to form and the energy in one-on-one challenges was lacklustre. Or it was, until Wheeler — the only clearly identifiable defensive midfielder in the squad — came on in the 86th minute. \"It's all about the timing,\" Gustavsson said of the late substitution. \"Sometimes you realise you do changes too early, sometimes you do too late, sometimes you get it perfect. \"I need to look at the game [again to see] if it was the right time. \"Maybe it was the right time because we've got the effect of it and we scored. \"Would it have been even more effective if I did it earlier? I need to look at the momentum of the game. \"One of the reasons why I didn't change is I felt we had a momentum going […] I felt that we were playing good, we had advantage. And you need to kind of sense that moment as a coach: When do you do that change? \"But I'm going to look at the game and see if I could have done it earlier or if it actually was perfect.\" There is something more to be said, then, for perfect timing. Indeed, it is the foundation upon which Gustavsson's entire coaching philosophy— his compartmentalising of \"preparation mode\" (friendlies) and \"performance mode\" (tournaments). Matildas and USA squads show two different ways of planning for the future. Timing threads itself throughout everything here, from the varying minutes given to players on the field, to the schedule of friendlies that are organised in the build-up to major competitions, to the speed at which players are integrated into the team over the course of a multi-year cycle. Gustavsson himself only gets, in total, roughly three months with his players each calendar year. If he does not time things perfectly, he cannot achieve the goals that have been set out by and for him. This USA friendly series is the last time we'll see the Matildas before they travel to India to play — and, according to Gustavsson, seriously challenge for — the Asian Cup, a trophy they first won over a decade ago but have fallen agonisingly short of lifting again ever since. Based on this two-game series against the USA, some are sceptical the Matildas can reclaim the Asian title. However, this is not the first time Australia have headed into a major tournament after a series of unconvincing performances. It happened before the Olympics, too, yet Gustavsson was able to lead them to an historic fourth-place finish. January, then, will be the next big test of Gustavsson's broader approach, and whether these challenging friendly games have given him enough information to translate those lessons into the \"performance mode\" that tournaments require. Depending on the Matildas' results in India, we will all be able to better assess whether his large-scale vision and preparation with this side has arrived too early, too late, or whether he — like Wheeler — has timed it to perfection."}, "/news/2021-12-02/a-league-women-guideclub/100640298": {"description": "A club-by-club look at the 2021/22 A-League Women's season", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": "           While they've held onto exciting young striker Chelsie Dawber and attacking midfielder Emily Condon, the Reds have also lost two of last season's most dangerous and experienced goal-scorers in Maria 'Cote' Rojas and Mallory Weber. The recruitment of Japanese duo Reona Omiya and Nanako Sasaki could offer a different edge to Adelaide's midfield this time around, while the late loan inclusion of American defender Kayla Sharples from the NWSL to partner emerging Aussie centre-back Matilda McNamara looks promising. How quickly these new players click and find their rhythm with Adelaide's established core will be key to their success this season.               As a result, the Roar have recruited almost an entirely new team, and their biggest challenge will be putting these jigsaw pieces together in an effective and sustainable way. The return of Katrina Gorry from maternity leave will be welcome experience to a largely youthful side, while the recruitment of exciting NPL strikers Shea Connors and Meaghan McElligott could fill the Gielnik gap. However, the hefty turn-over in central positions and the lack of experience, particularly in defence, could make this a bumpy season for Brisbane, though the emergence of a new crop of young Australian players could add some silver linings.               As such, if Canberra is to simply out-score other teams on their way to finals football again, they'll need to diversify their attacking unit enough to keep things unpredictable. They may well do so with the recruitment of Allira Toby, Holly Caspers, and America's Chelsee Washington, but it's the return of veteran striker Ash Sykes that looks the most promising. Together, Sykes and Heyman were part of the 2011/12 Canberra side that won the premiership-championship double, becoming the first club to go through the season undefeated, both of them scoring in the grand final to defeat Brisbane 3-2. Rekindling that strike partnership could be key if United are to return to finals football.               However, Chidiac – along with most of City's better players, including goalkeeper Teagan Micah, defender Jenna McCormick, midfielders Chinatsu Kira and Noor Eckhoff, and striker Harriet Withers – have not returned, meaning City are almost starting from scratch again. Questions surround City's new-look attacking line-up, too: there are few out-and-out strikers in their defence-heavy squad, with 29-year old Kiwi international Hannah Wilkinson leading the line alongside vastly less experienced players. The return of Kiwi Rebekah Stott from cancer and the emergence of young stars Darcey Malone, Leticia McKenna, Winonah Heatley, and Chelsea Blissett will be some of the few joys in what could end up being another underwhelming campaign.               Fortified by the dazzling centre-back pairing of Claudia Bunge and Kayla Morrison, the latter of whom has been named as this season's captain, as well as the fierce running of full-backs Angie Beard and Polly Doran, Victory barely had a weak link across their regular starting squad. The loss of De Vanna, Beard, Football Fern Annalie Longo and veteran goalkeeper Gaby Garton this season will be felt, but Victory have recruited wisely to fill those gaps, bringing across emerging Matilda Courtney Nevin from Western Sydney to cover for Beard, while the recruitment of USA striker Lynn Williams could easily replace the speed and dynamism of De Vanna. Barring catastrophic mid-season injuries, this Victory side looks like the one to beat.               The arrival of Norway attacker Marie Markussen and American midfielder Elizabeth Eddy will help paper over these frailties, as will the Jets' retaining of Andrews and speedster Lauren Allan, who has continued to improve over her first two seasons at this level. Like Adelaide, the challenge facing Newcastle is time: how quickly can their new midfield gel, particularly given the late arrivals of some international players? And have they found another dimension to their attack that tends to fall back into old Andrews-heavy habits when the going gets tough?               They finished dead-last last season after the pandemic wreaked havoc on the schedule. The question for Perth this season, particularly as the Omicron variant rears its head in Australia, is whether they navigate a potential second disrupted campaign if Western Australia snaps its borders shut to the rest of the country again. They've had more preparation coming into this new season, and the pockets of chemistry developed between the young national team players will likely come in handy. Guided by veterans like Lisa De Vanna and Kim Carroll, will the Glory's youth-heavy squad be able to take on the bigger dogs in the competition?               The big question for Sydney is how they will cope with the loss of former captain and midfield anchor, Teresa Polias. Her experience and leadership aside, Polias was also one of Sydney's most important players on the field last season, ranking in the top five across the league for goal involvements - particularly from set pieces. Fellow veteran Ellie Brush has also been ruled out with a second ACL injury, though the recruitment of  33-year old Chilean Maria 'Cote' Rojas from Adelaide could counter-balance that loss of maturity and experience. Further reinforced by talented young players like Sarah Hunter, Cortnee Vine, Jess Nash and Paige Satchell, a finals spot is almost guaranteed, while another trophy looks likely.               With a host of emerging Football Ferns in their midst, as well as some promising young Aussies, Wellington will do well to snatch points wherever they can, but there's little pressure to hit the ground running. Head coach Gemma Lewis has some advantages in terms of squad selection, recruiting a bunch of players she coached at youth national team level while working for Football New Zealand. Given the various obstacles of their pre-season, the Phoenix will likely take a while to find their groove, but it'll be exciting to watch none the less.               Former Matilda Catherine Cannuli's first season as a top-flight head coach will be challenging, especially having lost the experienced heads of Leena Khamis, Julie-Ann Russell, and Georgia Yeoman-Dale. However, Cannuli has made some shrewd recruitments in the off-season and has built what looks to be (on paper, at least) one of the most balanced midfields in the league. Goals have always been a problem for the Wanderers, though, and the loss of the tenacious Khamis will be felt. It could be some time before this club meets expectations, but the squad Cannuli has put together feels like the start of something.  "}, "/news/2021-12-01/ahead-of-the-ashes-heres-where-we-left-australian-test-cricket/100570158": {"description": "Have you forgotten what happened last summer? You're not alone. Catch up on the Aussie Test team before the Ashes", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " As nu metal songbirds Staind once crooned, it's been a while. If you can't really remember the state of men's Test cricket in Australia, you're not out of line. Since January 6, 2020 (a simpler time before we knew of the impending pandemic doom approaching), the team has played exactly four Test matches; all of them against India last summer. But suddenly, we have an Ashes series on our shores and to say the team is short on long-form cricket practice would be an understatement. So, where were we and where are we with the biggest series in cricket just a week away? After rolling India for just 36 while winning the first Test, things only went downhill for the Aussie Test side. India was without *deep breath* Virat Kohli, Ishant Sharma, Mohammed Shami, Ravi Ashwin, Ravindra Jadeja, Jasprit Bumrah and Umesh Yadav for all or some of the series. breaching the Gabbattoir for the first time to seal the series Battered and bruised after a challenging summer, India dug deep to ice a series win on Australian soil with an astonishing triumph at the Gabba, writes Russell Jackson. Former England captain Michael Vaughan later joked on Fox Cricket: \"There's no shame in losing to India's Third XI.\" Some of the highlights included: Basically anything except Test cricket. culminated in glory Coming straight out of the Tests against India, they jumped across the ditch to get beaten 3-2 by New Zealand. a squad unstudded by stars to Bangladesh Justin Langer's position as coach was questioned an English shellacking Australia lost its Test captain Getting international athletes to come to Australia with such strict quarantine requirements for the past two years hasn't been easy. So, bringing touring sides out was a challenge, but the long stretches without Test cricket came in Australia's winter and autumn anyway. This is an issue of Aussies not touring. It seems the focus on the T20 World Cup has meant scheduling long-form cricket hasn't been a priority. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. A Test tour of Bangladesh that was supposed to take place in June last year was canned   England, played 20 games in the same 23-month span in which Australia played four Which all brings us to now. With so little red-ball cricket played of late, it's hardly surprising that we might be a bit confused about what's going on, because there simply haven't been enough games to move the needle much in the past 11 months. The last male Test XI was:  the 15-man squad for the Ashes Warner, despite only having three centuries from his past 29 Test innings, is in. As are Labuschagne, Smith, Cummins, Lyon and Hazlewood. Starc is also probably on that list at least for the first Test, but he had a rough go the last time he pulled on whites, taking just three wickets across the final two Tests against India. Lyon only took nine in the series, but Aussie spin options are thin on the ground, while  Speaking of not taking a lot of wickets, Green is a lock after impressing with the bat in his first Test series and backing it up with scores of 106, 61 and 53 this Shield season, but the wait continues for his first Test pole, and the wickets at domestic level aren't exactly coming in bunches either. That leaves spots two, five and seven in the line-up open. Pucovski's return from concussion delayed by troubling ongoing symptoms Khawaja is second in run-scoring this Shield season with two tons The Queenslander's solid Test average of 40.66 jumps up to 96.80 in his seven innings as a Test opener, compared to Harris's 23.77 in 19 Test innings without reaching three figures, but  Head has scores of 163, 101 and 55 in the Sheffield Shield this season, as well as a blistering 230 off 127 in the domestic one-day tournament. He also has two Test tons and seven half-centuries in 31 Test innings, with an average just under 40. A bit like Khawaja during the 2019 Ashes, Head was unlucky to be dropped last summer, with Wade keeping his spot in the XI after doing selectors a favour by standing in for an injured Warner to start the series. Carey has been the heir apparent to Paine for a few years A practice game starting today will give some indication of where selectors are leaning, but we'll find out in a week exactly what their plan is and over the next few months discover if four Tests in two years was too few."}, "/news/2021-12-02/aflw-releases-bumper-2022-fixture-every-round-season/100668882": {"description": "AFLW releases bumper 2022 fixture — check out every round of the new season", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The 2022 AFLW season will feature 10 home and away rounds and three weeks of finals, with St Kilda and Richmond kicking it all off on January 7. The Saints and Tigers will meet under Friday night lights for the league's first game at Frankston Park, before traditional AFLW rivals Western Bulldogs and Melbourne headline the Saturday night round one action. Rounds nine and 10 have yet to be locked in as the league plans for maximum flexibility in the lead-up to finals, but a concrete fixture has been confirmed for the first two months of the season. Games will be played at 24 venues across the country, and in every state and territory for the first time, while a single ladder will remain in place with the league again opting against the conference system used in seasons past. \"The season starts in just over a month and like many in the Australian community, we cannot wait for AFLW footy to return,\" the AFL's general manager of women's football, Nicole Livingstone said. \"We acknowledge the ongoing pandemic has been a challenging period for so many in our game and the wider community and we thank all players, clubs and supporters for their patience as we worked towards finalising the fixture for the 2022 NAB AFL Women's Competition. \"It shapes up to be the best season yet with so much to look forward to from that opening round right through to the AFLW grand final. \"We look forward to watching the young stars who are set to immediately impact the competition and, equally, the veterans who continue to lead the way.\" Round three will be the AFLW's now-traditional Pride Round, and round eight will be the Indigenous Round. This is the last season before the AFLW transitions into a full 18-team competition in 2023. See the full fixture of rounds one to nine below (all times local).                                                  "}, "/news/2021-12-01/vanessa-vlajkovic-on-taking-up-blind-low-vision-tennis/100652896": {"description": "From meeting Novak Djokovic to playing blind and low-vision tennis, the court opens up for Vanessa Vlajkovic", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " I am 24-years-old and I have a Masters degree in writing, editing and publishing from the University of Queensland. Competitive ballroom dancing is what I live for, and Harry Styles is my favourite singer. Sounds pretty normal and boring, right? I agree. But here's what you won't expect — I am profoundly deaf and my vision is limited to counting fingers at 20cm in front of me. Since I was quite young, I'd sit for hours glued to the TV watching Novak Djokovic win grand slam after grand slam in quick succession. I idolised him; I was his ultimate number one fan. Whenever he won a point, I'd pump my fist and yell, often to the exasperation of other family members. I believed Novak was tennis' king — he ruled when it came to this sport. And it was my dream to meet him one day.  They say dreams do come true, but only if you put in the effort to make it happen. So that's exactly what I did — I booked myself a trip to Melbourne in January 2020, vowing that this was going to be the year I would meet my hero. Novak Djokovic's quest for a calendar Grand Slam has ended, for now, but Djokovic's greatness — although it might be begrudgingly offered — cannot be denied, writes Simon Smale. The weather was miserable in Melbourne — windy, wet and generally freezing. I caught a cold almost immediately, which dampened my excitement for the Australian Open. Feeling pretty unwell, I thought how unfortunate it was that I had to get sick at such an important time — could my body not have picked another week of the year to bail on functioning at its optimum? Still, luck was with me. I persisted with hassling Novak's security team and was at long last granted a photograph with him. Not even the fact I felt like a train had ran over me at high speed could ruin that moment — I was positively, 100 per cent ecstatic. The years of waiting and watching had paid off; it wasn't just some wild goose chase. The icing on the cake was a signed cap which Novak himself fetched from his bag and gifted to me. What an incredible experience and one I will never forget. The media were there and someone shoved a microphone under my mouth, prompting me to express my emotions. But I was lost for words, utterly overcome with poorly-disguised happiness. \"I have a lot of doubters, people who think that I will fail,\" says Vanessa Vlajkovic, a deafblind young woman and journalism student who plans one day to bring you the news. Could you blame me though? I'd just met one of sport's greatest legends, I could hardly be expected to form coherent sentences. Star-struck was a slight understatement — this had another layer to it than most people would have anticipated. Due to my sensory loss, I can only watch tennis on TV — live games are not an option. So at the Open, my goal was to meet the players who mattered to me; a more intimate and memorable bucket list item than I could have hoped for. Obviously, Novak was the priority but I also snagged a picture with Nick Kyrgios and Milos Raonic. The previous year I had managed a selfie with Roger Federer in Perth, which had fuelled my desire to aim higher on the famous people spectrum. Fast-forward to June 2021 and I am scrolling my Facebook feed at some random hour of the day, when I come across a post promoting blind tennis. I stopped scrolling and started thinking — could this actually work for me? Find out how you can get involved this year on the IDPwD website. Never, not at any point in the last decade, did I imagine I could play tennis. It just did not seem realistic for someone who couldn't see or hear. How on Earth could I be entertaining such an idea? You're being silly Ness, I reprimanded myself. But despite these doubts, my curiosity got the better of me and I found myself standing on a tennis court one Tuesday night, surrounded by other blind players. On the drive to the tennis centre, I'd been arguing with myself about the ridiculousness of the whole thing — I'd almost convinced myself it was a cruel joke the internet was playing on me and there was no such thing in existence. I was soon to find out how wrong I'd been to question my abilities so intensely. I was warmly welcomed by Ian Ketteringham and Dan Bentel, my coaches. Although on this first evening it was extremely cold to be outdoors, I ended up surprising myself by having a lot of fun. The balls we used were very soft, contained a bell, and came in black and fluoro yellow. Aside from these adjustments and the fact that the ball was allowed to bounce more than once before being hit, blind and low-vision (blv) tennis resembled sighted tennis. The same rules still applied, there were just these minor changes to account for the lack of vision. Naturally, the bell was of no use to my ears, so I channelled my energy elsewhere. Several weeks later, I asked Ian for a private lesson as I had discovered that the one hour a week wasn't satisfying my deep thirst for improvement. Something had become unleashed inside me — I wanted to learn, and thereafter to win. It was new territory for both Ian and I, we would have to muddle along and figure out things as we went. I began to genuinely look forward to my private classes each week — Ian and Dan were very encouraging and open-minded, which helped make me feel at ease and comfortable making mistakes because they were never critical. The coaches seem to believe I have the potential to win games — if a professional is telling me this then it must hold some truth surely? I guess we'll see.   The new year has some exciting things in store for me, I just need to be patient and everything will fall into place. The success of the Paralympics in Tokyo offer all of us an opportunity to reassess how we view and treat people with disabilities in modern society, writes Matthew Haanappel. Putting on my journalist hat, I asked Dan and Ian on their thoughts about blind tennis and how they found it coaching me. \"There have been so many rewarding things about the program, but I think the most rewarding part would have to be that I'm bringing my favourite sport to a group of people for whom it was previously an impossibility,\" Dan said. \"Ness's approach to training has been impressively consistent. She wants to be on a tennis court as often as possible, and she is super keen to learn and improve. \"She (Ness) has really high expectations and is maybe a little too hard on herself at times, considering she's only been playing five months.\" I don't think I'm ever too hard on myself, so I found this speculation amusing. I've always been over-ambitious to a fault, but I find it's a good trait to have because it means the bar is always set a tad higher than I can reach, which motivates me to keep climbing. \"Ness continues to defy the restrictions I have mentally placed on what should and should not be possible. Adding hearing impairment to the challenge of blind tennis is something I cannot entirely grasp, still,\" Ian said. I can imagine that it must be daunting for these coaches, who have only ever been used to teaching sighted players, to confront a whole new side of the sport. I would like to use this platform to extend my sincerest appreciation for Ian, Dan and the rest of the team that have made such an enormously positive impact on my life in a remarkably short period of time. And unquestionably, the lives of the other blind players. Sometimes a simple thank you doesn't feel sufficient, and so I hope that by acknowledging publicly their determination to make tennis inclusive and accessible, these few special individuals will take a second to be proud of what they do. In terms of the future, I know that with COVID-19 it's hard to plan forwards these days; nothing can really be set in stone because of the delicacy of the pandemic. From the start Dylan Alcott was hard to ignore — but after two Paralympic careers, a string of major titles and now a Golden Slam, the Greatest Showman has transformed wheelchair tennis, writes Andrew McGarry. However, this isn't stopping me from dreaming about competing nationally and internationally in blind tennis. The Paralympics is my main goal, but first I need to advocate for blind tennis to become a para sport, because currently it isn't. In the meantime, I will content myself with training six days a week and preparing my body and mind for whatever 2022 wants to hurl my way. I am so grateful that I stumbled across such a wonderful opportunity for self-exploration, it's been a ride like no other and I couldn't have predicted how powerful holding a racquet would be. Maybe somewhere down the track, Novak will be brave enough to put a blindfold on and see how well he can return my serves. ABC is partnering with "}, "/news/2021-12-03/tennis-australia-100-million-loss-covid-australian-open/100671988": {"description": "Tennis Australia hit with $100 million loss from COVID-19, Australian Open quarantine", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Tennis Australia sustained a net loss of more than $100 million in the 15 months around this year's delayed — and COVID-19-affected — Australian Open, the body's 2020-21 annual report showed. The cost of flying players from around the world to Melbourne and quarantining them for two weeks in hotels put a huge financial burden on the organisers of the Grand Slam tournament. Restricted crowds — as well as a snap lockdown that kept fans out of the Melbourne Park precinct altogether for five days — limited the opportunities to mitigate the losses through ticket sales and other on-site revenue generators. The accounts showed Tennis Australia recorded a net loss of $100.02 million from July 30, 2020 to September 30 this year. Tennis Australia's cash reserves of $80 million were exhausted and the governing body took out a loan of $40 million to help get them through to next year's tournament. Despite concerns around the Omicron COVID-19 variant, Australia's external and internal border controls are being slowly relaxed as vaccination rates in the country rise. After last summer's MCG Test and Australian Open had severe restrictions, Victoria's government is lifting crowd caps in time for both events to have capacity crowds. Organisers are hoping for a more normal Australian Open in 2022. The tournament will return to its usual January slot after being put back to February last year, while all the stadium courts will be able to hold their full capacity. Players and officials who have been vaccinated will be allowed to fly into Australia and compete without any quarantine requirement.  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/how-max-verstappen-can-win-the-f1-championship-this-weekend/100663906": {"description": "This is how Max Verstappen can win the F1 title this weekend", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Max Verstappen will go into this weekend's Saudi Arabia Grand Prix with a slender, eight-point lead in the Formula 1 drivers championship. The 24-year-old Red Bull driver has almost been helpless in the past two races as seven-time champion Lewis Hamilton stormed to consecutive victories, closing the gap between the drivers. However, while Hamilton and his Mercedes team have all of the momentum, Verstappen can still be crowned world champion in Jeddah. For this to happen, Verstappen will have to finish in the top two, or the title fight will go to the season finale in Abu Dhabi. To be world champion, Verstappen will have to leave Saudi Arabia with a 27-point lead over Hamilton. Verstappen will become champion this weekend if he finishes: This weekend will be the first time Formula 1 cars race around the streets of Saudi Arabia's second-largest city. Formula 1 predicts the average speed of the cars across the laps will be 252 kilometres per hour, quicker than at Silverstone or Monza. The street circuit is set to offer plenty of overtaking opportunities, which organisers hope will provide a dramatic, unpredictable race. McLaren driver Lando Norris said he believed drivers were going to enjoy the new track after practising in the simulator. \"The track in Jeddah is going to be fun. It's a really fast and flowing track with close walls, which will create a unique challenge,\" he said.   \"I've been driving the circuit in the simulator to get up to speed with the layout. \"Qualifying in these cars at this circuit is going to be a very cool experience.\" Daniel Ricciardo says his McLaren team has been working tirelessly in preparation for the season's final two races, on the back of a run of disappointing results. After the Australian finished fifth in the US, he has failed to score a point in the next three races. The poor run has taken away any hope of Ricciardo finishing the year higher than eighth in the drivers championship. A tough run of results for his teammate Norris has allowed Ferrari to surge past McLaren into third in the constructor's championship as well. Ricciardo said the team around him believed they could end the season on a high note, starting with this weekend's race. \"We don't really know what to expect in Jeddah, but we've been working hard as a team back in the UK to prepare for the event, and we head to the Middle East ready to fight,\" he said. \"We'll be doing our best to bring home some decent points and end the season on a high.\" The Australian said he had taken time away after struggling in the previous three races, which has him prepared for the push to the season finale. \"Coming off the back of an intense — but ultimately disappointing — triple-header, it's been good to take some time out of the car and reset for the final two races of the year,\" he said."}, "/news/2021-12-03/cristiano-ronaldo-scores-800th-career-goal-manchester-united-win/100671284": {"description": "Cristiano Ronaldo scores 800th career goal as Manchester United grab win over Arsenal", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Cristiano Ronaldo has reached 800 career goals with a double securing Manchester United a 3-2 victory against Arsenal in the Premier League. And interim manager Ralf Rangnick was there to see his new team triumph from the stands. A lot has changed at Old Trafford since United's last home game 26 days ago, with Ole Gunnar Solskjaer losing his job after that loss to Manchester City was compounded by a shocking defeat at Watford. Michael Carrick, Solskjaer's assistant, has steadied the team during an unbeaten three-match caretaker stint that ended with an entertaining win featuring a bizarre opening goal and another demonstration of Ronaldo's enduring excellence on his return to the side. He scored the winner from the penalty spot after his first goal allowed him to reach 800 for his career for club and country. Liverpool's attack proves too strong for Merseyside rivals Everton, with Mohamed Salah adding two more to his English Premier League tally — as two league games are temporarily suspended due to medical emergencies in the stands. Rangnick's first game in charge will be against Crystal Palace this Sunday. The German has signed a deal until the end of the season and Thursday's game will have given him food for thought, having seen the team's quality and ongoing defensive concerns from the directors' box. Finding a way to keep clean sheets will be key if this season is to be a success for United. But there was little that could be done to prevent Emile Smith Rowe's bizarre opener. David De Gea was rolling around in apparent pain on the goal line when Smith Rowe struck a volley from the edge of the area, with the VAR instructing referee Martin Atkinson to award the goal as it was the Spaniard's teammate, Fred, who hurt the goalkeeper by treading on his foot at a corner. Bruno Fernandes, making his 100th United appearance, equalised in the 44th, before Ronaldo turned home Marcus Rashford's cross to bring up his landmark early in the second half. Arsenal took just two minutes to bring the match back level as Martin Odegaard found the net with a low finish, good work he undid 16 minutes later with a rash challenge on Fred inside the box. Atkinson awarded the penalty after the VAR advised him to watch the pitchside monitor, with Ronaldo keeping his cool in front of the Stretford End to lash home what proved to be the winner. The night started with a giant \"20LEGEND\" banner being unfurled in that stand as the United faithful chanted club great Solskjaer's name following his exit last month. It ended with United announcing Carrick would be stepping down as first-team coach and leaving the club where he also starred as a midfielder from 2006-18. In the other game of the night, Son Heung-min's goal at the end of a sweeping counterattack sealed Tottenham's 2-0 win over Brentford, leaving Antonio Conte unbeaten in three Premier League games in charge of the London team. Son played a part in the 13th-minute opener, supplying the cross from the left that Brentford defender Pontus Jansson cleared onto the head of teammate Sergi Canos. The ball ricocheted backward into the net. The South Korea forward scored the second himself in the 65th by tapping into an unguarded net after meeting a square ball from Sergio Reguilon, who had been set free by an exquisite through-ball from Harry Kane.    "}, "/news/2021-12-03/ioc-says-it-has-had-second-call-with-peng-shuai/100671162": {"description": "No details, but IOC discloses second video call with Peng Shuai", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The International Olympic Committee said it has held a second video call with Peng Shuai but, again, didn't release any video or transcript of their conversation nor make any reference to the tennis player's sexual assault allegations against a former high-ranking Chinese government official. A grand slam doubles champion and three-time Olympian, Ms Peng dropped out of public view after making her accusation, eventually prompting the women's professional tennis tour to suspend its tournaments in China. As Beijing finishes its preparations to host the Winter Olympics from February 4, 2022, the IOC revealed on Thursday that it had held a second video call with Ms Peng after IOC President Thomas Bach's recent statement that he spoke to her on a 30-minute video call and that she appeared to be \"doing fine\". \"This was reconfirmed in yesterday's call,\" the IOC said. \"Our human and person-centred approach means that we continue to be concerned about her personal situation and will continue to support her.\" Once again, the IOC did not release video or a transcript of the exchange, nor explain how the call was arranged. The IOC repeated its policy of \"quiet diplomacy\", dealing directly with sports officials, which, it said, \"given the circumstances and based on the experience of governments and other organisations, is indicated to be the most promising way to proceed effectively in such humanitarian matters\". It said it would \"stay in regular touch with [Ms Peng], and have already agreed on a personal meeting in January\", which would be shortly before the lucrative Beijing Games begin. The tennis world responds to the WTA suspending tournaments in China due to concerns over the treatment of Peng Shuai, with the organisation receiving support from the likes of Billie Jean King, Martina Navratilova and Andy Roddick. raising allegations about former vice premier Zhang Gaoli in a November 2 social media post that was quickly taken down by Chinese authorities Ms Peng is a former world number-one ranked doubles player and owner of titles at Wimbledon and the French Open.  concern for her welfare has prompted the WTA to suspend all upcoming tournaments in China and Hong Kong Foreign ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin did not directly mention the WTA during a press conference on Thursday but pointedly said China \"opposes the politicisation of sports\". In an editorial, the Global Times newspaper, published by the ruling Communist Party's People's Daily, said the WTA was betraying the Olympic spirit and bringing politics into tennis. \"Some forces in the West are instigating a boycott against the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics,\" it added, referring to the February event which some rights groups want boycotted over China's human rights record. The International Tennis Federation, the sport's governing body, said that Ms Peng's allegations \"must be addressed\". \"Our primary concern remains Peng Shuai's well-being,\" the ITF said in a statement. \"We will continue to support all efforts being made to that end, both publicly and behind the scenes.\" Chairman of the men's professional tennis tour, Andrea Gaudenzi, said the situation raised \"serious concerns within and beyond our sport\" and that the response \"has so far fallen short\". \"We again urge for a line of open direct communication between the player and the WTA, in order to establish a clearer picture of her situation,\" Mr Gaudenzi said. \"We know that sport can have a positive influence on society and [we] generally believe that having a global presence gives us the best chance of creating opportunity and making an impact.\" Men's world number one Novak Djokovic said he fully supported the WTA's decision saying her well-being was of utmost importance to the tennis community. \"I don't see anything wrong in the WTA and everyone actually, the ATP as well, asking for clarity on what is going on,\" he said. \"We don't have enough information and I think it's a very bold, very courageous stance from the WTA.\" Amnesty International's China researcher, Doriane Lau, said the Chinese government had \"a track record of silencing women who make allegations of sexual violence\" and called on the international community \"to urge the Chinese government to investigate all allegations of sexual violence promptly and effectively\".  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/phoebe-litchfield-cricket-wbbl-young-gun-looks-to-improve/100668378": {"description": "WBBL 'young gun' pushing for greater consistency to make Australian side", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Cricketer Phoebe Litchfield says consistency and self-confidence are the keys to improving her game after being named the WBBL Young Gun of the tournament.  The 18-year-old from Orange in NSW finished the season with 263 runs for the Sydney Thunder, while managing to juggle her NSW Higher School Certificate commitments. Litchfield said she struggled to cope with the pressure of batting at the top of the order early in the season.  \"If you were to tell me at the start of the season, I would be batting at three and got 260 runs I would probably be happy with that, but when I look at my season and what role I had, I should have scored more runs,\" Litchfield said.  \"I guess the challenge was that I compared myself to all the other 'threes' in the competition. \"I tried not to, but you just sort of do subconsciously, I think I just doubt myself at that position, but I found once I got more scores under my belt, I felt more confident. \"There are some great players, and I probably didn't score as many runs as I probably should have but I loved it and it was definitely a big learning curve.\"  Litchfield said this season gave her plenty of confidence, but she needs to improve her consistency.  \"I feel more comfortable at this level now and I have found myself feeling confident to score runs. \"Each time I was just getting myself out, so I think it is just about decision making and once I get in, I really need to make the most of it.\" The top-order batter said she does not expect to make the women's Ashes squad due to the quality of talent in the side but hopes her performances over the summer will put her \"name forward for tours in the next few years.\"  Litchfield said the series will provide a fantastic opportunity for her to step up within the NSW side and show leadership.  \"I love playing with the older players but when they head off [to the Ashes] it definitely gives me the opportunity to put my hand up and take the game on. \"When the Aussie girls go off to the Ashes we are going to be pretty slim, so hopefully I can take up more responsibility and score some runs.\" "}, "/news/2021-12-02/ashes-england-focused-on-steve-smith-ben-stokes-returns/100670514": {"description": "England seeking ways to keep Smith 'quiet', Stokes makes return in tour match", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " England's bowlers are making it no secret they are working on ways to keep Australian vice-captain Steve Smith \"quiet\" following his heroics in the 2019 men's Ashes series. The tourists will also be buoyed by Ben Stokes's performance with the ball in an intra-squad match in Brisbane on Thursday, with the all-rounder taking two wickets in his first playing appearance since July. Smith starred for Australia in England two years ago in what was his Test return following his 12-month suspension for his role in the 2018 ball-tampering controversy in South Africa. Against England in 2019, Smith scored a staggering 774 runs from just seven innings at an average of 110.57, with three centuries and as many half-centuries. He recorded a highest score of 211, his efforts with the bat helping Australia retain the men's Ashes following a 2-2 series result. England fast-bowling all-rounder Chris Woakes dismissed Smith a team-high three times during the 2019 series, although this was after the Australian had scored 142, 92 and 80 in the respective innings. Woakes — who averages 28.73 with the ball and 27.78 with the bat from 39 Tests — is in a selection battle to feature in a bowling attack likely to be led by veterans Stuart Broad and Jimmy Anderson. He said containing Smith was a key priority for the tourists as they prepare for the first Ashes Test starting in Brisbane next Wednesday. \"I've bowled at Steve quite a lot, he's a world-class player and had a lot of success against us and we need to figure out ways to keep him quiet,\" Woakes said. \"It's pretty obvious we have to keep him as quiet as we possibly can and I have got him a few times but he's probably been on 150 at the time, so would be nice to get him a little earlier.\" Woakes fronted up for the England Lions team that was sent in to bat against an apparent full-strength England outfit in the intra-squad up match at Ian Healy Oval on Thursday. He made 13 with the bat before being dismissed by Stokes, who also claimed the wicket of the England Lions' top scorer Zac Crawley (45). Stokes recorded the figures of 2-31 from 10 overs. Anderson (0-23) and Broad (0-15) went wicketless, with the England Lions reaching 4-226 at stumps. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. Stokes had not played any form of cricket since July after taking a mental health break that followed an injury-interrupted season. His last Test match was in March. Constant rain washed out the first two days of play, after just 29 overs were possible in last week's three-day tour match at Wellington Point's Peter Burge Oval. The match will continue on Friday. Australia called off play in its planned intra-squad fixture that was due to be played at Peter Burge Oval, the squad instead completing an indoor nets session at the National Cricket Centre.  "}, "/news/2021-12-02/afl-ron-barassi-tests-positive-for-covid-19/100669808": {"description": "AFL legend Ron Barassi tests positive for COVID-19", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Australian rules football legend Ron Barassi has tested positive for COVID-19, ruling him out of taking part in Melbourne's long-awaited AFL premiership celebrations at the MCG. The 85-year-old and his wife — who are both reportedly double vaccinated — are understood to have contracted coronavirus at a function last month. Barassi was set to hand over the premiership cup to Demons coach Simon Goodwin and captain Max Gawn in the club's official Victorian celebrations on Sunday. Former Melbourne coach Neale Daniher will present Goodwin with the Jock McHale Medal, while Christian Petracca will receive his Norm Smith Medal from the Demons' games record-holder David Neitz. For 57 years, Barassi was Melbourne's most recent premiership captain, having led the Demons to the 1964 flag. Such is Barassi's stature in the sport, he was inducted as one of the first legends in the Australian Football Hall of Fame in 1996. He played in six premierships during a golden era for the Demons between 1953 and 1964. Barassi later coached Carlton and North Melbourne to two premierships each. He also had coaching stints with the Demons and the Sydney Swans. Melbourne's official premiership party is set to be attended by about 40,000 fans, most of whom were stuck in Victoria's lockdown and unable to travel to see the drought-breaking flag live in Perth.  "}, "/news/2021-12-01/nrl-redcliff-dolphins-cq-partnership/100664464": {"description": "'Wonderful Christmas present': Central Queensland sees pathway to NRL with new partners Redcliffe Dolphins", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The newest team in the NRL may be based in Brisbane, but the Redcliffe Dolphins, to play in 2023, are now eyeing off talent further north, officially confirming an affiliation with the Central Queensland Capras. Capras CEO Peter White welcomed the news, calling it the \"holy grail\". \"This is something we've waited for for a long, long time, we're blessed, it's a wonderful Christmas present for us, not just for the club but also for the central Queensland region,\" Mr White said. \"It just seems that in the past … clubs have probably taken the easy option, that's to pick the eyes out of us, rather than contribute to what we're about.\" Mr White said it had always been a challenge to retain players, but he hoped the new partnership would put an end to that problem. \"Now [the players] know full well that they can stay, they can sleep in their own beds … they can be surrounded by their own network of friends, and the Dolphins are going to be keeping an eye on them,\" he said. \"We're just really excited with the discussions we've had, and we just know it's going to be a wonderful outcome for our region.\" The partnership has come just in time for a proposed $25 million redevelopment to turn Brown Park into a 10,000 seat stadium, with construction due to begin late next year. Dolphins head coach Wayne Bennett said it was a solid commitment that was not going to disappear in one or two years' time. \"I want the young men and women here to want to play for the Dolphins, that's the pathway, your pathway to the NRL is through the Capras onto the Dolphins and the rest is going to be history,\" Mr Bennett said. \"It's working-class Australia up here … I know that guys from this part of the world are certainly a lot more battled-hardened than the young boys that live in Brisbane. \"It's a quality that's a part of growing up here…and they epitomise that, and they have shown that as a team,\" the League legend said.  Redcliffe Dolphins CEO Terry Reader said he had been in talks about this for more than a year. \"When the NRL decided to bring in a second Brisbane team it wasn't just about Brisbane, it was about Queensland, and especially CQ [central Queensland],\" Mr Reader said. \"Everyone jokes about: It's a shame that Brisbane has only ever had one team, when it's the biggest league loving city in the world. Well I think we've arrived in the second biggest league loving city in the world — in Rocky. \"We've got 10,000 kids playing rugby league in central Queensland, [and] some of the greatest names in our game have come out of here, so it's making sure we can increase that. \"If someone is a Capras fan, we want them to be a Dolphins fan as well … we're going to actually make sure we have a meaningful presence here,\" Mr Reader said. Aspiring female players also stood to benefit, with Mr Reader stating there was a plan and structure in place to build a Dolphins NRLW team as well."}, "/news/2021-11-30/nrl-refuses-to-register-anthony-milford-south-sydney-contract/100663124": {"description": "NRL refuses to register Anthony Milford's Rabbitohs contract", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The NRL says it will not consider registering Anthony Milford's contract with South Sydney until the completion of criminal proceedings against the 27-year-old.  Milford has been charged with three counts of assault occasioning bodily harm and one count of wilful damage involving a vehicle after being arrested in Brisbane on September 20. Two of the charges allege violence against women. The arrest came after police responded to reports of a disturbance in the Fortitude Valley nightlife precinct. Milford signed a one-year deal with the Rabbitohs after his seven-season stint with the Brisbane Broncos came to an end at the conclusion of the 2021 premiership. \"Given the severity of the allegations, particularly that two charges allege violence against women, the NRL will not consider an application for registration until the court process is complete,\" the NRL said in a statement. South Sydney issued a statement of its own saying it \"respect and support\" the NRL's stance. The club said it would await the outcome of the legal proceedings. Milford faced court for the first time in October. Aside from the Broncos, he played two seasons with the Canberra Raiders, having made his NRL debut with the club in 2013. Milford has appeared in two State of Origin matches for Queensland and represented Samoa at the international level.  "}, "/news/2021-11-30/nrl-shaun-johnson-warriors-comeback/100662602": {"description": "Why everything is different for Shaun Johnson's Warriors comeback", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Sitting up there wearing the old colours and once again part of a club that never should have forced him out in the first place, he sure looked like the old Shaun Johnson. It was his first day in front of the media since returning to the Warriors, and he sure sounded like the old Shaun Johnson as well. \"I got my kit bag in the car and I left quarantine, and the first thing I did when I got home was put my kit on and look at myself in the mirror, like it was my first day at school,\" Johnson said. \"It was disbelief I was actually back, being able to wear this kit again and represent this club again. \"Coming in today and speaking to the boys, I don't know what happened to me — I got a bit choked up, thinking of the journey I've been on and ending up right back here.\" You wouldn't even need to squint to think this was the old Shaun Johnson; the highlight-reel Shaun Johnson, the Shaun Johnson who was forced to carry the footballing dreams of not just a suburb — like they do in Sydney — or a city — like they do in Brisbane — but of an entire nation. The Sydney NRL landscape is a fishbowl filled with piranhas, but at least there's other fish around. In New Zealand — when it comes to rugby league — there is just the Warriors, and for so long Johnson was their face in both good times and bad, and given this is the Warriors we're talking about there were plenty of the latter. To Johnson's credit, he never let that heavy burden weigh him down; not when he helped drive the club to the grand final in 2011, not when he lost years of his best football to their seemingly endless rebuilds, not even when they let him walk away at the end of 2018. It would be so easy to be bitter about that last one. After years of struggles, the Warriors had finally returned to the finals, finishing eighth but just two points off first. It was the best team Johnson had ever played on, one where Roger Tuivasa-Sheck, Blake Green and Issac Luke could ease the pressure. Despite a disappointing loss to Penrith in the first week of the 2018 finals, the pieces finally seemed to be fitting together, for Johnson and the Warriors. After years of rebuilding, they were built. But these are the Warriors, and too often their greatest opponent proves to be themselves. Johnson was allowed to walk (something about money and age, and injuries and the future) and the Warriors went from the brink of something all the way back to the start of something else. \"At the time I didn't think I needed to leave, or I should leave, or I wanted to leave, but I've always been one to make the most out of any situation you're in, or try to find the silver lining,\" Johnson said. \"It took a couple of months to realise I had a lot of growth to do — I'd been in the Warriors system since I was a kid. I didn't know any other way.\" So Johnson went to Cronulla, made the finals again as the Warriors crashed back into turmoil, and would have likely gone back there twice more if injuries did not end his season early two years in a row. It was three good campaigns, stopped from being something more by circumstances Johnson himself could not control, and it changed him. He returns to the Warriors a different player and a different man because he has a greater understanding of himself, on and off the field. \"Mentally, I've grown leaps and bounds from where I was three years back,\" Johnson said. \"The application I've put into the mental side of the game, who I am as a person, who I am as a player and what my best performance looks like, I've had some real clarity over that. \"Coming back here after a few years away, that's the biggest gain I have. \"I'm still learning, it's not like I'm the finished product — I've just seen how people approach performance and I truly believe I have a clearer picture of what it looks like for me, personally. \"Physically I've had a few struggles at times, but mentally my application and detail and understanding what winning football looks like is pretty clear.\" It's a good thing Johnson is quicker between the ears than he used to be, because he's right about those struggles with his body. He has only managed more 20 matches in a season once in the past seven years as he battled ankle, hamstring and Achilles tendon injuries. It changed him, because it changed what he could do. When it comes to Johnson it's easy to hold running the ball early — often and continuously — as the solution to all of his problems, but the truth isn't so simple because it never is when you're the halfback and in charge of so much more than yourself. If all Johnson had to do or could do was run, his career would probably be done with. His line breaks and tackle busts have slowly dropped since a serious ankle injury in 2015, but his try assist and line break assist numbers have steadily risen. The same thing happened to Stacey Jones and Benji Marshall when they aged, and to cross to the other rugby code it's the same situation Quade Cooper found himself in upon return to the Wallabies earlier this season. All three of those players grew and changed as their bodies demanded it — as Johnson has done — and so Johnson returns not as the fireball kid of yesterday, who bounced around and blew through gaps that weren't even there like he wasn't carrying New Zealand on his shoulders at all, but as the wise old man. The Warriors have the pieces of a good spine: two excellent forwards in Tohu Harris and Addin Fonua-Blake, and the bones of a decent team and one of Johnson's great gifts now is the ability to make others around him better. And of course, there is dynamic fullback Reece Walsh, in whom there is so much of the old Johnson. And while Johnson may still be the key man among the playmakers, he does not have to live up to the impossible tasks he was given in his youth. Instead, his directive from coach Nathan Brown is to show the rest of the spine — like Walsh, rugged five-eighth Chanel Harris-Tavita and the gifted but erratic Ash Taylor — a thing or two about a thing or two. \"We would hope with his experience — especially on the field — he can help us in some of the tight situations we found ourselves in this years,\" Brown said. \"A lot of times we couldn't close out games, or we found ourselves in situations where we were in good positions but we let ourselves down. \"With where Shaun is now, he's not as quick or as flashy as he was when he was younger, but for me he plays with much better control and he sees the game much better now. \"I hope that experience, that game control, can help the team and help our younger players in those key positions.\" They'll all be younger than Johnson at the Warriors, and they'll need his guidance as they try to navigate a third season away from home as the NRL grapples with the coronavirus pandemic. Even so, it's still jarring to hear he'll be the elder statesman of the roster next season, even for Johnson himself. \"It's a real young group of guys here,\" Johnson said. \"I'm the oldest person at the club at the moment, so I'm getting my head around that at the minute. \"Everyone is here to help turn the club around and if I'm honest, what I've seen in the strength and application the Warriors have shown to keep the comp going and in their performance, I think that work has already started and I'm just here to continue that.\" The Warriors aren't after the old Shaun Johnson, which is just as well because that guy doesn't exist anymore. They've got old Shaun Johnson, and that's enough for now."}, "/news/2021-11-28/australian-women-dominate-dubai-sevens-en-route-to-the-trophy/100656644": {"description": "Australian women dominate Dubai Sevens en route to the trophy", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Australia's rugby women have dominated the Dubai Sevens tournament, winning all five of their matches, including a consummate victory in the final against Fiji, to lift the prestigious title. The Australians had brought a new-look young side to Dubai after a disappointing fifth-placed finish at the Olympics, and showed all their immense promise with a handsome four-try 22-7 win over the Fijians in the final, including a double from Demi Hayes. The 2017 winners were in unstoppable form, scoring 163 points and conceding only 39 throughout. They took control of the final within three minutes as Hayes skipped through Fiji's defence to cross the line before Lily Dick pounced on a cross-field kick to charge over in the corner. John Manenti's side pressed home their quality, going into the break 17-0 ahead after a Charlotte Caslick try before Hayes sealed the deal soon after the break, scooting over from the back of a ruck. Fiji's response, a try from Alowesi Nakoci, proved too little too late. \"We've been working really hard since Tokyo, we were really disappointed with our results there,\" said Caslick, who was voted the player of the final. \"We took a lot away from that and I think it's starting to show. We're really clicking out there on the field and we love playing in Dubai. We always do really well here. Hopefully it's a good omen for the rest of the season.\" Australia had started the day with a 38-5 hammering of Brazil, with doubles from Caslick and Maddison Levi, before pipping France 24-22 with Sharni Williams going over for two early scores. The Australian men, though, didn't fare so well, thrashed 29-5 in the quarter-final by an imperious South African team who went on to win the final, crushing the US 42-7. Ronald Brown scored three tries and 25 points in the final as the formidable Blitzboks earned their record 18th-straight win in the sevens rugby world series, breaking their own team record of 16 in 2008-09. There had been little chance of Australia denting their superiority in the last eight, with Henry Hutchison's lone try being answered by five South African scores.  "}, "/news/2021-11-26/dave-rennie-apologises-to-referees-for-wallabies-spray/100655614": {"description": "Wallabies coach apologises for spray at referees after Wales loss", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Australia coach Dave Rennie has apologised for criticising the quality of officiating during their European tour following their 29-28 defeat in Wales after global governing body World Rugby issued a written warning. A succession of decisions by referee Mike Adamson, his officiating team and television match official (TMO) Marius Jonker left Rennie frustrated, with the coach defending his decision to go public with his complaints. \"Dave Rennie wishes to apologise to the match officials and to World Rugby for the choice of language used in post-match media commitments following the Wallabies Test match against Wales in Cardiff,\" Rugby Australia said in a statement. \"The choice of language and its timing did not meet the standards required from a coach or official in upholding rugby's core values of discipline, integrity and respect. \"Rugby Australia and Dave Rennie accept the formal warning issued by World Rugby.\" World Rugby added the sport was based on \"trust and respect\" with match officials being the \"backbone of the sport\" and Rennie's comments were \"clearly not aligned with these values\". On Thursday, South Africa's director of rugby Rassie Erasmus withdrew his appeal against a two-month ban and apologised to referee Nic Berry for his 62-minute video critique of the match official after the first test against the British & Irish Lions in July. Australia lost all three games in their European tour this month, also suffering defeats to Scotland and England.  "}, "/news/2021-11-25/super-rugby-pacific-stephen-larkham-returns-to-brumbies/100650670": {"description": "Larkham feels more 'developed' as a coach ahead of Brumbies return", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Wallabies great Stephen Larkham will take charge of the Brumbies for the second time in his career, saying he feels more rounded as a coach since departing Australian rugby in 2019. Larkham will replace Dan McKellar as Brumbies head coach following the 2022 season, having agreed to a two-year deal with the Canberra-based team. McKellar is on the Wallabies coaching staff and will move to the national program on a full-time basis after leading the Brumbies in the inaugural Super Rugby Pacific tournament next year. He had become Brumbies head coach after Larkham served in the role between 2014 and 2017, with the team qualifying for the finals in each of those seasons. claiming there were \"differences\" in strategy and philosophy between him and then-head coach Michael Cheika He moved to Irish club Munster later that year as senior coach and will step down from that position at the end of the 2021/22 European club season. Larkham — who won two Super 12 titles with the Brumbies as a player in 2001 and 2004 — said he believed he had improved as a coach during his time in Ireland. \"I've developed and learnt a lot both as a person and as a coach in these past couple of years, and I'm looking forward to bringing that experience back to the Brumbies to ensure their continued success,\" he said in a Brumbies statement. Larkham was an ACT junior and a Brumbies foundation player when the team debuted in the 1996 Super 12 season. His return to Canberra will see him link up with long-time Brumbies administrator, current chief executive Phil Thomson. \"Playing for the Brumbies as a Canberra local was obviously a special time in my life and the club were very supportive in my transition into coaching,\" he said. \"So I want to thank Phil and the Brumbies board for giving me this opportunity to come back and represent the club again as head coach.' Thomson said Larkham was the coach the Brumbies wanted to replace McKellar, who had guided the team to the 2020 Super Rugby AU championship. \"Through the recruitment process, Stephen proved to be the strongest candidate,\" he said. Larkham made 116 appearances as a Brumbies player between 1996 and 2007. He played 102 Tests for the Wallabies, winning the 1999 Rugby World Cup alongside fellow ACT juniors George Gregan, Joe Roff and Rod Kafer. Larkham first joined the Brumbies coaching staff in 2011 and worked as an assistant to Jake White when the team made the Super Rugby final in 2013.  He is set to return to Canberra next July."}, "/news/2021-11-25/world-rugby-eligibility-rules-allow-israel-folau-tonga-switch/100649374": {"description": "'I'm sure there will be controversy': World Rugby opens the door for Israel Folau to switch to Tonga", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Former Wallabies star Israel Folau could represent Tonga at the next Rugby World Cup after changes to eligibility requirements opened the door for him to make the switch. Axed by Rugby Australia in 2019 after homophobic social media posts, That absence, combined with the fact both his parents are Tongan, could open the door for the cross-code star to join the ʻIkale Tahi in time for the 2023 Rugby World Cup in France. Previously a player could not switch from one union to another if they had represented their nation's senior team, but that has now been scrapped. Now, the player has to show \"a close and credible link\" to the country in question — if they, one of their parents or one of their grandparents were born there; or if they've lived there for five years in a row, or 10 years all up. If that is established, the player can simply stand down from international rugby for three years before rejoining with the new national side. Tongan head coach and former Wallaby Toutai Kefu told the ABC's Pacific Beat he spoke to Folau about making the move. \"I don't have a problem with that. There hasn't been any been restrictions from World Rugby's side,\" he said. \"I'm sure there will be controversy, but we'll cross that bridge when it comes.\" There have long been calls for rule changes particularly to allow Pasifika stars to play for countries of their parents or even their own birth, and Oceania Rugby president Richard Sapias said the vote could reshape rugby union in the southern hemisphere. \"For a country the size of Tonga, you imagine the amount of players they have overseas,\" he told Pacific Beat. \"There's a lot of talent out there and it gives them a wide range of opportunities to choose from.\" World Rugby also announced its \"preferred candidates for upcoming World Cups, with Australia set to host the 2027 men's tournament. The World Rugby Council met last night and announced it would work exclusively with Australia on a model. However the hosting rights will not be officially locked in until a vote in May next year. Australia has not hosted the Rugby World Cup since 2003, when the Wallabies lost to Jonny Wilkinson's English side in the final, with 2015 the team's only other appearance in a final since then. winning the hosting rights could help move the sport back towards its halcyon days \"This is a huge step forward in our ambitions to host Rugby World Cup 2027 and for rebooting the game in Australia,\" he said. \"Throughout this process, we've held the genuine belief the time was right to bring the Rugby World Cup back to our shores.\" England was announced as the \"preferred candidate\" to host the 2025 women's tournament."}, "/news/2021-12-03/australias-best-wheelchair-tennis-players-to/13661772": {"description": "Australia's best wheelchair tennis players to compete in Melbourne", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": ""}, "/news/2021-12-02/wta-right-side-of-history-peng-shuai-case-says-billie-jean-king/100668822": {"description": "'On the right side of history': Tennis great Billie Jean King backs WTA stand over Peng Shuai", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Women's Tennis Association (WTA) founder Billie Jean King says the organisation is on \"the right side of history\" after it suspended tournaments in China due to concerns over the treatment of Peng Shuai. WTA chief executive Steve Simon made the announcement on Wednesday, citing concerns over Ms Peng, a former women's doubles world number one, after she posted a message on social media alleging that former Chinese vice-premier Zhang Gaoli had sexually assaulted her. whereabouts became a matter of international concern following a nearly three-week public absence, \"I applaud Steve Simon and the WTA leadership for taking a strong stand on defending human rights in China and around the world,\" said Ms King, a 12-time grand slam winner and pioneer for women's sport. \"The WTA has chosen to be on the right side of history in defending the rights of our players. This is yet another reason why women's tennis is the leader in women's sports.\" Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Wang Wenbin addressed local media on Thursday, but refused to comment about the WTA's suspension and concerns about Ms Peng's safety. \"We are always firmly opposed to acts that politicise sports,\" he said in a one-sentence response to journalists at a daily ministry briefing. Another great of women's tennis, Martina Navratilova, sounded a similar note to Ms King in a post on social media, also urging Olympics chiefs to get involved. @IOC The Women's Tennis Association's decision to suspend tournaments in China and Hong Kong comes as uncertainty remains over the safety of Peng Shuai, who recently alleged on social media that she was assaulted by a senior Chinese political figure. A number of other prominent tennis figures weighed in, with former world number one Andy Roddick tweeting that he was \"proud to be in the tennis orbit\". \"There are a lot of organizations who can afford to do something like this a lot more than the WTA can,\" he wrote. \"Respect.\" France's Alize Cornet tweeted: \"What a leader.\" American player Tennys Sandgren said he was \"beyond proud\" of the WTA and called on his fellow male competitors to act. \"Yo men, let's back the ladies up huh? We gonna sit this one out or what?\"  "}, "/news/2021-12-04/hay-bale-trail-in-northern-victoria-tongala-christmas-festival/100671402": {"description": "Sunny Tongala making hay while the silo art trail shines", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Christmas spirit in the tiny northern Victorian township of Tongala is drawing in tourists off the back of eased pandemic restrictions and the success of the Silo Art Trail. Last December, in between pandemic lockdowns, the local dairy farming community created an outdoor, COVID-safe and family friendly display of decorated hay bales that drew visitors from as far away as Sydney. It was a huge hit, bringing a new vibrancy to the town and increased patronage for local businesses. The Tongala Development Group decided they were on a winner and organised other hay bale celebrations throughout the year for Easter, Anzac Day and RUOK Day. Now, the community has launched its second Christmas Hay Bale Trail and hopes social media will continue drawing visitors to the area. The group's spokesperson, Amber Townsend, said shares on social media have played a huge part in the success of the project, and this year the organisers are encouraging people to take selfies. \"Once we were on social media, we had visitors come from far and wide,\" Ms Townsend said. \"Last year, during the first COVID lockdown, a local farmer decided to decorate some hay bales as [popular cartoon characters] Bluey and Bingo, and popped them out the front of her farm, which generated so much interest within our region they got moved into town, next to the post office. \"We're a small dairy farming community off two main highways, so we really want people to be coming through the small towns and seeing what we've got to offer.\"  Ms Townsend said the community is looking forward to seeing the streets lined with cars, the bakery \"run off its feet\", revenue coming into the town through the local petrol station, supermarket and stores, and grey nomads coming along the silo trail and making a detour through Tongala. Jordan Souter, who donated the hay bales from his local farm supplies business, was initially surprised by the idea. \"The committee are doing a really good job, bringing a lot of people into town on the weekends and even during the week,\" he said. Jackie Humphries, one of this year's hay bale artists, said her three young children loved going around and looking at all the artworks. \"Last year with COVID it was probably a bit tricky to gauge what response we'd get, so it'll be interesting to see who comes out, and hopefully the town and everyone really gets behind it,\" she said Organisers hope that with fewer border restrictions and lockdowns this year the installations will bring visitors in their droves, put a smile on children's faces, spark some spending and imbue everyone with the spirit of community and Christmas.  the third silo The artwork will follow the flora and fauna theme of the previous two painted silos and joins the more than 50 silos that have been painted nationwide in the past six years."}, "/news/2021-12-03/abc-to-add-more-than-50-journalists-in-regional-australia/100673862": {"description": "'A great way to start 2022': ABC to employ over 50 regional journalists after Facebook, Google deal ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The ABC has announced plans to hire more than 50 journalists to report from over 20 regional locations, following deals it struck with Facebook and Google. The new jobs will be spread across all states and the Northern Territory, with the positions expected to be filled by early 2022. Larger regional patches will get more support, in areas such as Horsham, Burnie, Dubbo, Wagga Wagga, Katherine, Esperance, Karratha, Longreach and Toowoomba. Smaller bureaus will be trialled in Warragul, Batemans Bay, Carnarvon, Hervey Bay and Charleville, while individual journalists will be stationed in Swan Hill, Whyalla, Victor Harbor, Northam and Gladstone.  More remote locations will also see ABC journalists embedded there for a shorter period of time. As part of the announcement, several new national specialist rounds will be added to the ABC's regional team, covering water, mining, social affairs and health. Managing director David Anderson says the cash injection will allow bureaus to deliver more local content across platforms. ABC managing director David Anderson said the additional reporters would be placed in areas that had previously been  \"news deserts\". \"We want to provide greater coverage of regional stories in areas that are under-served by the media,\" he said. \"Extra regional services are a great way to start 2022, our 90th year, and this announcement is fitting given the ABC's relationship with rural and regional Australia over those nine decades.\" The ABC entered into commercial negotiations with the digital platforms after the News Media Bargaining Code came into effect in February,   agreement with Google last month. Revenue from both will go towards increasing the ABC's investment in regional and rural journalism across Australia."}, "/news/2021-12-03/hunter-and-central-coast-dubbed-potential-renewable-superpower/100672612": {"description": "NSW announces Hunter-Central coast renewable energy zone, eyes $32b investment", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The New South Wales government is pinning its hopes on renewable technologies to turn the Hunter and Central Coast into an \"energy super power\". Treasurer Matt Kean has announced the creation of the Hunter-Central Coast renewable energy zone (REZ). Mr Kean said it would provide cheap, reliable and clean electricity for homes and businesses while supporting new job creation as Australia moved towards a low carbon future. The Treasurer called for expressions of interest for the REZ during a visit to the Tomago Aluminium smelter — the state's biggest single user of energy. \"The Hunter-Central Coast has been at the heart of providing electricity to NSW,\" Mr Kean said. \"Today's announcement is about ensuring that the Hunter and Central Coast remain at the heart of providing electricity for generations to come. \"Our renewable energy zones policy will see over $32 billion worth of private capital invested in NSW. \"It'll create around 6,300 construction jobs and 2,800 ongoing jobs and a huge amount of them will be right here in the Hunter and Central Coast.\" The EOI is aimed at renewable energy generators, storage providers and transmission line builders. They will need to outline how they plan to power the state into the future. Parliamentary Secretary for the Hunter Taylor Martin applauded the zones. \"We have got the right policy,\" he said. \"It is the right time to move ahead and deeply decarbonise our electricity generation.\" Parliamentary Secretary for the Central Coast Adam Crouch said the REZ made sense. \"It is a game changer for our region,\" he said. \"We know how important it is to move forward with regards to energy generation.\" Upper Hunter MP David Layzell also praised the move. \"In the Upper Hunter we are looking to develop new industries, to diversify all the industries across the board to make sure we have got jobs in the future,\" he said. vowed to switch to renewable energy by 2029 Chief executive Matt Howell said the REZ zone would help the smelter achieve that. \"We are on public record to say our ambition is to decarbonise and take away eight and a half million tonnes a year of carbon dioxide, moving from 100 per cent coal fired power to 100% firm renewables,\" Mr Howell said. When power demand has surged during heatwaves, cold snaps and natural disasters Tomago has been forced to \"power down\". Mr Howell said the REZ plan made sense because it would stabilise the power grid. \"We see it as an important step in allowing us to decarbonise and we certainly look forward to playing our part in the future,\" he said. Sign up here"}, "/news/2021-12-03/women-from-perth-gym-win-80-million-powerball-jackpot/100671752": {"description": "'We ordered the finest bottle of champagne': Perth gym buddies win record Powerball jackpot", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A group of women from a Perth gym is celebrating after claiming WA's largest-ever division one lotto win.  The syndicate of 55 women from the small, 'ladies only' gym in the northern suburb of Beldon will pocket around $1.45 million each after their ticket won Thursday night's Powerball jackpot of $80 million. One of the winners Lorna — now nicknamed 'Lucky Lorna' — told ABC Radio Perth she thought someone was pranking her when she found out the good news. Her fellow winners were out at a Christmas dinner that she could not attend due to another function.  \"[When] I came home, I went to bed and thought 'I'll just check my phone' and I had all these missed calls from a lady from the gym. \"I thought 'why on earth would she be calling me?', so I texted her back and I said 'why are you calling me? You better be ringing me to tell me we won the Powerball'. \"She said 'actually we have' and I said 'stop mucking around'. \"And she said 'I'm not mucking around, we're at the Christmas party at the little local restaurant — jump up, get dressed, come join us'.\" Lorna came to the realisation that it was probably the real deal when she heard everyone in the background screaming and popping champagne corks. \"It took me like 10 minutes to get there and when I walked in, everybody was crying and hugging each other,\" she said.  She said the group had joked about how they hate it when one person wins $80 million for themselves and that it should be spread out among more people. \"So I think it's marvellous that it's been spread around to so many people,\" she said. \"I know each and every one of these women and they are all the loveliest, kindest people who meet at our gym, which is more than a gym — it's like a little social club for middle-aged women.\" The women each put in $5 for their share of the Slikpik 50 winning ticket, which was bought from a newsagent in Ocean Reef. Gym owner and syndicate organiser Sue told the ABC's Kate Leaver it was \"surreal\" to win the jackpot.  \"I feel like the biggest Santa Claus in the world at the moment because I bought this ticket for these ladies and it's changing all of their lives and it really is amazing,\" Sue said.  She said the gym was \"the most amazing community\", attended by women from all walks of life. \"We all love coming here and we're all battlers at the end of the day and now we're all millionaires. \"We're all heading off to Lotterywest, we all want to see what the winners' room looks like.\" Australia's biggest ever lottery prize, $150 million, is up for grabs, but winning the nine-figure windfall could change your life for better and worse. She said the group ordered the \"finest bottle\" of champagne when they found out they had claimed the record prize.  \"One of our husbands called to tell us we had won and the minute we found out it was pandemonium,\" she said. \"Christmas this year is going to be bigger, brighter and better than ever — it will be a very special time for all of us.\" $50 million in 2015  Lotterywest acting chief executive Jeremy Hubble said the win was a history-making moment. \"It's always incredible to meet our winners and to meet such a large group of syndicate winners, who can all share in the magic and joy, [it] is just wonderful,\" he said. \"This record-breaking win for WA shares the title of third highest on a national level.\""}, "/news/2021-12-03/coober-pedy-only-bank-westpac-shuts-temporarily-eftpos-debit-atm/100672526": {"description": "Coober Pedy locals without EFTPOS access 'beside themselves' at bank closure", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Coober Pedy's only bank has been shut until next week, leaving vulnerable residents who do not use debit or credit cards unable to easily access their money. The Westpac branch on Hutchison Street in the isolated opal mining town simply had a note on the door explaining it would be closed until Thursday, locals said. Coober Pedy woman Julie Hammermeister said some locals, who did not want to use the town's ATM, were unable to buy food for themselves. \"Women who do not usually use the services in town have been forced to go in and get assistance with food, and they are absolutely beside themselves,\" Ms Hammermeister said. \"They go into the bank to access their money, because a lot of people get humbugged [by someone demanding money] if they stand at the EFTPOS machine.\" Fellow local Carrie Adamo said the closure had caused \"a great deal of stress\". \"It's going to impact on people's day-to-day spending with just food and refuelling their car et cetera,\" she said. \"Many ... Indigenous people prefer old-style banking because it's safer — they are able to control their money without their cards being used in the [ATM] by other people.\" She said there was a funeral at Indulkana on the APY Lands that could not go ahead because attendees could not access money for transport. \"It's not the first time it's happened, but this is such a long time and it's in the Christmas month, school holidays start today and people are travelling. It's given the town massive inconvenience,\" Ms Adamo said. \"A lot of people here don't have access to online, and maybe their only outing for the day is to grab their cash and go to the supermarket,\" Ms Hammermeister said. The bank usually opened Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays for four hours a day. In a statement, a Westpac spokesperson said the branch was temporarily closed because of staff availability and would reopen as soon as possible.  They said in the meantime, customers could use the branch ATM or contact the company or the Indigenous Connection team for assistance."}, "/news/2021-12-03/alec-baldwin-says-he-assumed-gun-was-empty/100672070": {"description": "Alec Baldwin says he assumed gun that killed Halyna Hutchins was empty of live bullets", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Alec Baldwin says he assumed the gun he was holding was empty of live bullets before it went off and killed a cinematographer during a rehearsal on the set of the movie Rust. In an emotional television interview which aired on Thursday night, US time, the actor also said he did not see any safety issues on the set before the incident where cinematographer Halyna Hutchins was killed. \"We both assumed the gun was empty, other than those, you know, dummy rounds,\" Mr Baldwin told the US ABC's George Stephanopoulos. The actor had been handed the gun by a crew member and told it was safe. He said he did not pull the trigger. \"I would never point a gun at anyone and pull a trigger at them,\" Mr Baldwin said. \"The notion there was a live round in that gun did not dawn on me until about 45 minutes later.\" Ms Hutchins died and director Joel Souza was wounded when the gun fired off a live bullet. David Halls, the assistant director who handed Baldwin the gun, backs up the actor's assertion that he did not pull the trigger. Lawyers for the 24-year-old say she doesn't know where the live rounds found there came from. Lisa Torraco, a lawyer for Mr Halls, told ABC earlier on Thursday that her client has always said Baldwin never pulled the trigger. \"He told me, since day one, he thought it was a misfire,\" Ms Torraco said. \"Until Alec said that, it was just really hard to believe, but Dave has told me since the very first day I met him, that Alec did not pull that trigger.\" No criminal charges have been filed, but two crew members have filed civil lawsuits accusing Mr Baldwin, the producers and others of negligence and lax safety protocols. \"I did not observe any safety or security issues at all in the time I was there,\" Mr Baldwin said. Authorities are focusing on how a live bullet, rather than a blank, ended up in the gun and how live rounds got onto the set at the Bonanza Creek Ranch. Investigators have described \"some complacency\" in how weapons were handled on the Rust set. They have said it was too soon to determine whether charges will be filed, amid independent civil lawsuits concerning liability in the fatal shooting. Mr Baldwin said he met with the film's armourer, Hanna Gutierrez Reed, for a gun-training session before the shoot, and she appeared capable and responsible. \"I assumed because she was there and she was hired that she was up to the job,\" he said. Ms Gutierrez Reed has been the subject of much of the scrutiny in the case. Her attorney has said she did not put the round in the gun, and that she believed she was the victim of sabotage.  "}, "/news/2021-12-03/wollongong-nightlife-covid-outbreak/100670452": {"description": "'Eye-watering' losses as COVID-19 outbreak forces bar closures", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A COVID-19 outbreak has decimated Wollongong's nightlife, creating chaos for business owners navigating the new reality of \"living with COVID\". After a difficult year, Illawarra nightspots have enjoyed a bumper trade since reopening. But business at four of the city's most popular bars has ground to a halt after they were linked to multiple COVID-19 cases. The Prince, Pepe's on the Beach, the Towradgi Beach Hotel and The Illawarra were all declared COVID-19 exposure sites, with staff and patrons forced into isolation. The Illawarra was hoping to remain open after its employees initially tested negative — but those hopes were dashed when two staff tested positive for the virus overnight. \"We have had to stand our staff down and isolate them for a week,\" owner Ryan Aitchison said. \"This means like a lot of venues we can't open our doors until they come out of isolation.\" Mr Aitchison said it was disappointing that they seemed to be back to square one after a strong reopening which saw them claw back some of the losses from the lockdown. \"We have had a great month of living on cloud nine operating at a large capacity,\" he said. \"It is a sad reality when you think that was a false dawn because the inevitability of COVID spreading was always there.\" The Illawarra will close for a week and is expecting to lose \"tens of thousands\" of dollars during one of the busiest trading periods of the year. \"We are looking at what was going to be a record week for us,\" Mr Aitchison said. \"It is hard not to get emotional when you are replacing a week of positivity with costs that are just eye-watering.\" Under current health guidelines businesses which are exposed to a COVID-19 case are not directed to close. But staff are usually considered close contacts who are required by NSW Health to get tested and isolate. Mr Aitchison said under these conditions it is almost impossible for hospitality venues like his to operate. 'We know now that we are all very vulnerable to COVID cases coming into our businesses,\" he said. \"We have just found out that living with COVID can only be done if there is no COVID around.\" The situation is also likely to become a lot more complex for business owners on December 15, when unvaccinated patrons are allowed to return to venues. Mr Aitchison said following the outbreak in Wollongong he expects businesses to take a harder line allowing patrons into their businesses if they are unvaccinated. \"I would not be surprised if some businesses turn around and say our house policy is to not allow unvaccinated people in for that reason.\""}, "/news/2021-12-03/indonesia-food-demand-expected-to-quadruple-by-2050-more-imports/100670616": {"description": "Demand for food in this country is expected to quadruple by 2050. So what does it mean for Australia?", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Indonesia's demand for food is expected to quadruple by 2050, and Australian imports could help to fill the gap. Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARES) executive director Jared Greenville says growth prospects for Indonesia's food market are enormous. \"We expect food demand to quadruple by 2050 based on rapid growth in the country's demand for more diverse and higher-value foods such as meat, dairy, fruit and vegetables,\" he said. According to a new paper produced by ABARES, Indonesia's trade policies, since 2012 in particular, have contributed to many Indonesians being poor and hungry. \"The historical focus on self-sufficiency has had a high economic and social cost, particularly through higher food prices,\" it said. COVID-19 restrictions, meanwhile, have pushed an extra 1.1 million Indonesians into poverty, according to the World Bank. It says the pandemic has pushed poverty-reduction progress in Indonesia back three years and that 27.5 million Indonesians – 10 per cent of the population – are now classified as poor. ABARES suggests that allowing more foreign investment could decrease Indonesian food prices and improve quality. It also predicts that once Indonesia's health crisis subsides, its growing and increasingly urbanised middle class will pressure policy makers to allow more imported food into the country. Dr Greenville said those products could include cold-climate Australian fruit. \"Red meat is another one where there's a large opportunity,\" he said. \"Just because of the land mass Australia has and the relative advantage we have in producing beef and sheep meat.\" ABARES said it was likely that about three quarters of the value of food-consumption growth in Indonesia would come from imported products by 2050. Dr Greenville acknowledged many Australian farmers – particularly beef producers – may be frustrated by failed attempts to sell into the Indonesian market. But he said persistence was the key. \"Australia does have a long relationship with Indonesia, being one of our closest neighbours … there have been frustrations in the trade and it's a fairly complex regulatory environment in Indonesia to engage with,\" he said. \"But I think the incremental and the long-term story really points to the value of persisting at closer market ties. \"If some of these numbers do come to bear in the future, there's going to be a big opportunity there.\" Australia Indonesia Business Council (AIBC) president Jennifer Mathews welcomed the ABARES report.  \"Australia's reputation as a reliable supplier of clean, safe and high-quality food and its existing agricultural trade relationship provide an excellent platform to increase supply to meet Indonesia's growing demand for premium agri-food products,” she said. \"In entering the Indonesian market, however, it's important that Australian producers take time to understand Indonesia's priorities around productivity and self-sufficiency, and conduct due diligence into the policy and regulatory environment.\" \"AIBC sees emerging opportunities for Australian industry to partner with Indonesia in making the transition to a green economy – including in the decarbonisation of the agricultural sector and in building sustainable supply chains.\" \"In order to realise the full potential of this partnership, it will be important for Indonesia to continue with the implementation of relevant regulatory and policy reforms.\""}, "/news/2021-12-03/second-supreme-court-challenge-to-woodside-scarborough/100663080": {"description": "Warning WA does not need Scarborough gas to keep the lights on, as Woodside legal fight grows", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Conservationists have doubled down on their determination to fight Woodside's plan to build the $16.5 billion Scarborough gas project over concerns about its projected greenhouse gas emissions. The Conservation Council of WA (CCWA) this week launched its second legal action targeting the WA government's management of the project's approvals over a number of years — in particular, how greenhouse gas emissions were considered. Just days before Christmas, the WA Supreme Court will hear another CCWA challenge, this time to Scarborough's environmental approvals, which it argues were unlawful because they did not adequately consider the project's impact on the climate. But WA Premier Mark McGowan appears to want to shift this battle to a different arena. the possibility of state intervention if the approvals were found to be invalid \"We can't have scores of industries close down because of a court ruling, so the state government will do what it has to do to make sure industries stay open,\" Mr McGowan said when asked about the legal action. \"Other industries or other projects have received approvals that this might have an implication for. \"We want to keep the lights on and make sure our hospitals continue to function.\" So just how important is Scarborough — Australia's biggest oil and gas project in a decade — to keeping WA's lights on? The Scarborough project involves piping gas from the Scarborough gas fields to an expanded Pluto facility on the Burrup Peninsula for processing.  Scarborough is slated to start production in 2026, with most of its gas headed to overseas markets like Japan and South Korea. But it will also produce domestic gas. According to a new analysis by climate scientist Bill Hare, the extension of Pluto's Train 1 and construction of Train 2 will increase domestic gas production from 25 to 250 terajoules a day. 125 Tj/day will be supplied to Perdaman's proposed urea plant on the Burrup Peninsula and 40 Tj/day to Woodside's planned H2Perth project \"[The] project would effectively add 20 per cent to the domestic gas (DomGas) supply in WA, well above the projected demand throughout the next decade,\" his report said. \"These additional fossil gas resources lock in a significant new demand for gas that does not presently exist, adding substantially to state emissions.\" But Woodside disputes Mr Hare's 250 Tj/day figure, saying the total domestic capacity for Pluto is 225 Tj/day. Dr Hare, who received support from the CCWA for the study, said WA did not need Scarborough gas to keep the lights on because there would be more renewable energy options by the time it was available. \"We've got renewables, we've got battery storage and we've got coming availability of hydrogen,\" he said. \"So really on the time scale of a decade or so, we could be 100 per cent renewable in the electricity space by the early 2030s, as are other places. \"So we don't need the gas for that.\" The most current data from the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) shows that gas supply is expected to meet forecast demand in WA until 2029. only given the final go-ahead last month — and will be updated in coming weeks Most of WA's domestic gas supply is used for industrial purposes, with only 12 per cent used for electricity generation. The AEMO expects gas demand to grow by about 0.7 per cent each year, due to industry requirements, although demand from WA's main electricity network — the south-west Interconnected System — is tipped to fall by about 0.4 per cent annually.  A federal government report published in October showed WA's electricity market emissions were expected to decrease by 2030 because it would be using more renewable energy, particularly rooftop solar. But the report, titled 'Australia's Emissions Projections 2021', also said gas would continue to play a significant role, even as the share of renewables in electricity generation was tipped to increase from 15 per cent in 2019 to 45 per cent in 2030. \"Gas generation continues to support reliability in the [WA Wholesale Electricity Market], and is projected to be the single biggest fuel source throughout the decade,\" it said. \"Baseload gas generation is projected to be at a similar level by 2030 as 2019, while coal generation declines.\" Grattan Institute energy program director Tony Wood said WA was the most gas-intensive state in the country due to the demands of industry and power generation.  \"We know that power generation can be solved with renewables but not completely because we haven't yet worked out what we do when the sun goes down,\" he said. Mr Wood said gas would continue to play a role in the energy mix but this would diminish as renewables became cheaper. \"This need for gas is going to go on for some time,\" he said. \"Maybe the use of gas as the fundamental ongoing source of electricity most of the time is replaced by renewables, however you still need gas to back up the renewables until you've got a solution to the storage issue.\""}, "/news/2021-12-03/fiji-hotel-quarantine-omicron-covid-variant-opening-/100668440": {"description": "Want to travel for the fun of it, but worried about cancelled plans? One country is offering a solution", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Just when it seems safe to finally book that trip, COVID comes along and delivers a fresh blow. When the Omicron variant emerged over the weekend, travel plans were disrupted, changes were quickly made to Australia's border, and anyone who was about to confirm tickets to a faraway place might have had a second thought.  For nearly two years, a small island nation and neighbour to Australia has been hanging on these moments.  Fiji has pushed to get its vaccination rate to more than 90 per cent and has come up with a model for international travel that requires travellers to stay in the same place for a few days, but also feels nothing like quarantine.  A lot was riding on December 1, when the first international flights were due to touch down in Nadi. Then, just a few days beforehand, the Omicron variant appeared.  And while individual plans being disrupted is one thing, what they mean collectively to an entire country is something else. The decision was made to proceed.   Fiji is selling its model for travel as quarantine-free, and for the most part it is.  There are a range of conditions you have to meet to board the plane, including things travellers are getting used to such as pre-flight PCR tests and having an international vaccine certificate.  But it's what happens once you arrive that sets Fiji apart.  The deal is, international arrivals have to spend their first three nights in accommodation that has been accredited under a program called the Care Fiji Commitment (CFC).  At the 48-hour mark, there will be a rapid test, and after returning a negative result, visitors are free to leave the resort area and head further afield.  But from the moment visitors land, they are not restricted as they have been in traditional hotel quarantine models.  Approved transfer companies can move visitors between the airport and their resorts, then between resorts or to day trips and activities that are also approved by the CFC system.  For 48 hours, travellers have to stay within the CFC zone, but that covers countless resorts, restaurants, bars, pools, a long strip of beach and the warm waters of the Pacific Ocean.  Inside the resort people are asked to use Fiji's COVID check-in app and wear masks in some areas. Hotels will be able to take care of the rapid tests and some also have onsite PCR labs, which Australian travellers will need to visit in order to board a plane home.     Chief executive of Tourism Fiji Brent Hill said the idea was to provide a space where travellers know they will be taken care of.    \"We want people to feel really safe and secure, but at the same time we want them to enjoy [themselves], and perhaps get away from all the craziness that's in our world, and just have an enjoyable Fijian holiday,\" he said.  News of the Omicron variant was the first test in Fiji's experiment.  Fijian Attorney-General and Minister for the Economy Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum told the ABC the government was confident in the moves it had made to increase restrictions for nationals arriving from red-list countries.  \"It's still early days, but in the meantime we believe we have enough of a safety net to ensure it doesn't creep into Fiji, or if it does that we will be able to manage it,\" he said.  On Thursday, Fiji's Secretary for Health Dr James Fong confirmed there were people already in Fiji's quarantine system who had returned from African nations and tested positive for COVID, but it will be some time before genomic sequencing can confirm if these cases are the Omicron variant.  Also on Thursday, planes from Sydney, Melbourne, Los Angeles and San Francisco delivered more tourists to Fiji.   has a long list of \"travel partner countries\" The question for travellers is whether the arrangements in Fiji help to reduce the uncertainty that comes with booking travel now.    There is no doubt that travel of any kind has been made more difficult by COVID.  But with so many Australians spending time locked out of the country, away from friends and family on the other side of international or state borders and lockdowns that come hard and fast, how much desire will there be to risk further complications by travelling for the fun of it?  Tourism expert, senior lecturer in development studies at Massey University and Fijian native Dr Apisalome Movono said there was a \"push and pull\" scenario at play.  \"The pull factor is that Fiji is open and very few destinations in the Pacific, if any, are open at the moment, so that's a major contributor to people coming. They are able to,\" he said.  \"And it's also that push. We've been through 22 months of continuous lockdowns, uncertainties, not being able to travel, unwind, reinvigorate.\" Fiji is expecting 75,000 tourists to arrive over the next two months.  Dr Movono said the ultimate test would be whether Fiji's tourism industry can achieve \"some form of normalcy\".  \"The success of this experiment hinges on Fiji's ability to sustain the smiles, the happiness and the promise of a safe and good holiday,\" he said.   \"It will require some tweaking, building resilience into the system for different types of shocks. \"Fiji, we are going all out now to re-open, but there are many what-ifs.\"  For the people of Fiji, there is an immediate economic need to bring tens of thousands of hospitality and tourism staff back to work. But there have been some concerns raised by the opposition and community groups about the health risks to the population, with much still to be learnt about Omicron.  Dr Movono said the situation had \"high stakes\".   \"Fiji was quite intent on opening up, tourism is too important for us not to,\" he said.  \"Let's see how this experiment pans out.\""}, "/news/2021-12-02/fedex-twu-pay-rise-agreement-industrial-action/100670444": {"description": "FedEx workers will receive over 9 per cent pay rise as wage agreement is reached before Christmas", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Global delivery giant FedEx and the Transport Workers' Union (TWU) have reached an in-principle deal on a new enterprise bargaining agreement (EBA), marking the end of a marathon negotiation between major delivery and logistics firms and the union. The new EBA announced includes a wage increase between 9.25 per cent and 9.75 per cent subject to Consumer Price Index (CPI) over three years, as well as an additional 2 per cent increase in superannuation during a three-year period, reaching 13 per cent in 2023. The agreement also includes a commitment from both parties to review the agreed wage increase at the two-year mark against the Consumer Price Index, capped at 3.5 per cent. But it is still pending final approvals from the union members and the Fair Work Commission. Peter Langley, vice-president from FedEx Express Australasia, said it was \"good news\" for Australian businesses ahead of a busy holiday season. \"This means we can now focus on working together to keep supply chains moving and meet the community's needs, especially during such a critical and busy period,\" he said. \"We are so pleased to be able to recognise and reward all the hard work that our team members have contributed throughout the pandemic in order to support our wider community.\" Australia Post warns this Christmas will be the busiest festive season on record, with parcel volumes surpassing last year's record 52 million. The union's NSW/QLD secretary Richard Olsen welcomed the agreement and said it was a \"fair deal\". \"This has been a long and difficult seven-month negotiation,\" he said. \"It was critical, essential transport workers at FedEx received sustainable wage rises which keep up with the cost of living, significant increases to superannuation and provisions which lock in their job security.\" The union also noted that FedEx's wage offer is the largest, but not by much, as FedEx workers were arguably paid less than their peers. Under the current agreement, some FedEx workers can earn up to 11 per cent less than workers in comparable roles in other transport companies, according to the union. Global supply chain problems are set to cause pain for Christmas shoppers this year. COVID-19 outbreaks have closed ports and factories resulting in a backlog of shipments to Australia. The agreement concludes a round of bargaining between the union and Australia's major transport companies, affecting over 20,000 transport workers. Toll and Australia Post's parcel subsidiary StarTrack have also recently reached new EBAs with their workers, bringing an end to strike action. Toll drivers will get an initial pay rise of 2.75 per cent and a second wage increase in line with the inflation rate up to 4 per cent, before mid-2023. StarTrack workers won similar provisions of 3 per cent pay rises every year for three years. The industry was facing a pre-Christmas parcel delivery crunch. Toll locked workers out of its Sydney distribution centre as part of an escalating industrial dispute last month But that's unlikely to happen again given the latest in-principle agreement, and FedEx said that was not an ongoing policy."}, "/news/2021-12-02/fixed-rate-mortgages-below-2-per-cent-disappear-from-big-banks/100669286": {"description": "Big bank mortgages below 2 per cent going, going, gone", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Property investors are going on a borrowing spree not seen in years, even as the last sub-2 per cent mortgage rate from a big bank disappears. Australian Bureau of Statistics lending finance figures for October showed a fall in home loan demand overall, but property investor loan commitments rose 1.1 per cent. The value of newly approved investor loans in October was 90 per cent higher than a year ago, and the head of finance and wealth at the ABS, Katherine Keenan, said it was now close to record levels. \"The value of new loan commitments for investor housing has grown for 12 consecutive months, reaching $9.7 billion in October 2021,\" she observed. \"This was the highest level since the all-time high in April 2015.\" Investor activity increased the most in South Australia (+15 per cent), Queensland (+8.9 per cent to a record high of $2.1 billion), and the Northern Territory (+78.7 per cent, but it is volatile because of a small population). \"Strong net interstate flows into Queensland are supporting the housing market in this state,\" wrote CBA economists Kristina Clifton and Belinda Allen. Victoria and the ACT were the two states on the nose with investors in October, with both recording a fall in new lending to that group. However, Victoria saw a slight increase in owner-occupier loans, along with Tasmania and the Northern Territory. New South Wales (-8.4 per cent) had the biggest fall in owner-occupier loans. Nationally, it was first home buyers being displaced from the market as investor lending climbed. \"First home buyers numbers continue to drop for the ninth month in a row, down 30 per cent from the peak in January of this year on the back of surging property prices and escalating interest from investors,\" said RateCity's research director Sally Tindall. \"While proportionally first home buyers are being wedged out, over 140,000 owner-occupier first home buyer loans have been approved so far this year — that's over 4,000 more loans than in 2020, with two months of data still to come.\" CBA's economists expect the decline in owner-occupier demand to continue. \"Higher fixed mortgage interest rates, APRA's lift in the minimum serviceability buffer and affordability constraints are likely to see lending continue to drift lower,\" CBA's economists explained. \"Lending is a good leading indicator of dwelling prices and we expect dwelling price growth to slow in 2022 and for prices to fall in 2023.\" NAB on Thursday closed the door on the major banks offering sub-2 per cent mortgages through their main brands. It raised its fixed rates for the third time in less than six weeks, with some mortgages going up by 0.5 of a percentage point. House price falls are all but baked in as interest rates start rising over the next couple of years, writes Michael Janda. That saw NAB's cheapest one-year fixed mortgage rise from 1.99 per cent to 2.49 per cent. The one-year fixed rate was playing some catch up to longer-term fixed mortgages, which NAB had already increased twice over recent weeks. The move leaves the lowest one and two-year big bank fixed mortgage rates at 2.24 per cent. RateCity's Sally Tindall said the major banks had \"succumbed to funding pressures\" as market interest rates rose sharply globally over recent months. She said she did not expect that trend to stop. \"When people go to re-fix their loan in one or two years' time they could find the majority of rates start with a '3',\" she warned. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand raises its official cash rate for the second meeting in a row as it moves to counter surging inflation, but Australia is not in the same boat yet. There are still sub-2 per cent rates available with a couple of the big banks' offshoot brands and many of the smaller banks and credit unions, according to Rate City. The lowest of these is a 1.59 per cent one-year fixed rate, and there are still two- and three-year fixed rates available below 2 per cent, while the lowest variable rate is currently 1.77 per cent. But Ms Tindall said smaller banks' fixed rates were also on the way up. \"The number of fixed rates under 2 per cent is fast disappearing,\" she said. \"Six months ago, there were 166 fixed rates starting with a '1', and now there are just 78, and the exodus is far from over.\" The same trend applies to investor loans, with many more fixed rates rising than falling. Ms Tindall noted that investor loans also face additional pressures from the banking regulator. \"Investors have paid a premium for their mortgages since mid-2015. This came on the back of APRA's introduction of a cap on growth in investor lending in December 2014 and the release of the Financial System Inquiry's Final Report, which flagged a requirement for banks to hold more capital,\" she observed. \"Right now, according to RBA data, the average new owner-occupier is paying 0.34 percentage points less than the average new investor. \"When looking at fixed rates of three years or less, this gap is slightly larger (40 basis points) and smaller when looking at variable (27 basis points). APRA announced on Monday banks would be required to hold more capital for riskier types of loan \"While the banks have been charging their customers a premium for investor loans for the last six years, we could see some banks lift investor rates further in the lead up to this 2023 change.\""}, "/news/2021-12-02/report-recommends-two-albany-landslide-homes-be-demolished/100666756": {"description": "Landslide report recommends demolitions of homes, cause still unknown", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A report into a landslide in Albany has recommended the demolition of two homes and a more detailed investigation into the root cause of the slide.  The Mira Mar hillside has dropped by more than 3 metres in some areas in recent months leading to evacuation orders on six properties with two on Sleeman Avenue on the brink of collapse. residents and authorities remain locked in a battle Some residents blame a burst water main on Sleeman Avenue on July 30, which Water Corporation flatly rejected. The water authority and the City of Albany have blamed high winter rainfalls, however, the report said further \"detailed geotechnical investigation\" and \"detailed forensic study of the root causes of the landslide\" were needed. The preliminary assessment included five recommendations. The report by CMW Geosciences recommended the demolition of 10 and 12 Sleeman Avenue due to hazard concerns. It also recommended improvements to security and signage at the site to prevent access to what it described as \"very high risk to people traversing the landslide\". The report also recommended further detailed geotechnical investigation into the landslide, its current stability, sensitivity to changes, and potential to enlarge. Further recommendations included aerial surveying of the hillside and installation of more dewatering wells. The report revealed the slide created \"subsurface cavities and voids\" that without mediation could form sinkholes creating further hazards. Movement in the area was first confirmed in 2013 due to rainwater ingress into uphill cracks, with the report concluding that some features of that event coincided with the most recent slide and it was \"likely the 2021 landslide is a reactivation, albeit larger than earlier landslide\". A petition calling on Water Corporation and Water Minister Dave Kelly to take responsibility for the landslide was launched by some residents this week. However, the report said further investigation was required and the scope of the study did not include forensic assessment into the \"root cause of the landslide\". The report said increased rainfall in recent weeks had coincided with the landslide movement accelerating. \"This however does not necessarily signify that rainfall is the primary initiation mechanism of the landslide,\" it read. Some residents on Anzac Road have shifted encroaching earth and boulders from their properties, but the report said \"it should be noted that excavating into a toe of a landslide has a significant risk of causing the landslide to accelerate\". Sign up here"}, "/news/2021-12-02/coles-underpays-7800-employees-more-than-115-million-allegedly/100669200": {"description": "Coles underpaid over 7,800 employees more than $115 million, Fair Work Ombudsman alleges", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Coles has been accused of underpaying more than 7,800 employees a total of $115 million by the Fair Work Ombudsman (FWO). The FWO has begun legal proceedings against the supermarket giant in the Federal Court. It claims the alleged underpayments occurred between 1 January 2017 and 31 March 2020. The alleged underpaid Coles employees were working in regional and metropolitan areas across every state and territory. Most were responsible for managing a department or function within a Coles supermarket, such as bakery, customer service, delicatessen, dry goods, fresh produce, meat and night-fill. The FWO alleges most of the underpayments were the result of Coles paying its salaried employees annual salaries that were insufficient to cover their minimum lawful entitlements, given the employees generally performed \"significant amounts of overtime work.\" Coles says it has underpaid staff in its supermarket and liquor stores and has set aside $20 million to pay back employees. The FWO alleges Coles’ salaried managers were generally contracted and rostered to work 40 hours per week, but often worked more hours. It alleges the salaried managers worked an average of approximately one hour per shift on top of their rostered hours, during that three-year period. The FWO also alleges that weekend and public holiday penalty rates, allowances and a range of other entitlements were also underpaid. The alleged underpayment of these salaried managers ranges from small amounts to $471,647 and it is alleged that 45 of them were underpaid more than $100,000. It is also alleged that Coles breached record-keeping laws under the Fair Work Act by failing to keep proper records, including some records relating to overtime worked. The development comes after Coles Group Limited disclosed to the FWO and the Australian Securities Exchange in early 2020 that it was reviewing the pay of award-covered, salaried employees in its liquor and supermarket businesses. was setting aside $20 million to pay back employees However, the FWO says Coles's remediation program has \"significantly underestimated\" amounts owed to employees. Following its own investigation, the FWO alleges Coles has underpaid 7,812 employees a total of $115.2 million. It alleges more than $108 million remains outstanding from Coles's remediation program. It is alleged that most of the underpayments relate to overtime entitlements under the General Retail Industry Award 2010. A directions hearing in the Federal Court in Sydney is still to be scheduled. In a statement to the stock exchange on Thursday, Coles said it was reviewing the proceedings filed by the FWO. It said the issues related to the \"interpretation and applications of various provisions of the General Retail Industry Award\" and if further remediation was required, it would update the market accordingly. Sandra Parker, Fair Work Ombudsman, said underpayments resulting from insufficient annual salaries for employees covered by awards had become a persistent issue among businesses of all sizes, across a number of different industries. \"Businesses paying annual salaries cannot take a 'set-and-forget' approach to paying their workers,\" Ms Parker said. \"Employers must ensure wages being paid are sufficient to cover all minimum lawful entitlements for the hours their employees are actually working and the work they are actually doing.\" Ms Parker said it was a priority for the FWO to see large employers undertake remediation programs \"correctly\" after underpayments had been discovered. \"This court action against Coles should serve as a warning to all employers that they can face serious consequences if they do not prioritise workplace law compliance,\" Ms Parker said."}, "/news/rural/2021-12-02/accc-green-light-to-175-million-jbs-rivalea-piggery-takeover/100668436": {"description": "Brazilian meat giant wins ACCC approval for Rivalea piggery takeover", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " despite earlier issuing \"strong concerns\" The proposed takeover includes Victoria's largest pig abattoir, Diamond Valley Pork at Laverton in Melbourne, which has the capacity to process 13,500 pigs per week. Rivalea also farms pigs and operates an export-accredited abattoir at Corowa in southern New South Wales. In September, the ACCC said it was concerned the acquisition could give JBS an incentive to frustrate access to service kills by increasing prices, offering less favourable terms or foreclosing access, and that consumers could face higher pork prices if processors were lumped with higher slaughter costs. But in the months since, JBS has managed to persuade the competition watchdog that it would continue to provide service kills at Diamond Valley Pork. ACCC deputy chair Mick Keogh told the Victorian Country Hour,  the ACCC had been persuaded that the acquisition was unlikely to \"substantially lessen competition\" and therefore would not breach the Competition and Consumer Act. \"There was a lot of concern expressed by pig producers who utilise the Diamond Valley abattoir and its contract kill services … that the takeover may result in growers having less access to that and therefore it could be anti competitive,\"  Mr Keogh said. But he said after looking closely at the transaction the ACCC found there was a low risk that JBS would frustrate wholesalers' access to third-party service kills. \"You have to look at the incentives and the incentives of the owner is to maximise throughput and therefore profit,\" Mr Keogh said. \"That was the case under Rivalea and we wouldn't expect that to change greatly with the new ownership.\" the acquisition of Rivalea would give JBS control over a third of Australia's pig meat. Mr Keogh said any further acquisitions in the pork industry in Australia would require a high level of scrutiny. \"You would certainly not want to see any further consolidation amongst the major players,\" Mr Keogh said. Mr Keogh said the ACCC will be \"closely watching\" trading behaviour in the pork industry and \"will not hesitate to take enforcement action if there is any conduct that breaches the competition or fair trading provisions\". Northern Victorian pig farmer and Victorian Farmers Federation (VFF) pig group president Tim Kingma said he was thrilled there is a company wanting to invest in the pork industry. Mr Kingma is confident JBS will continue offering kill services for smaller producers at its Diamond Valley abattoir. \"From a VFF point of view our biggest concern was the ability for pig farmers to get their pigs slaughtered at Diamond Valley Pork,\" he said. \"We had a meeting with JBS and the ACCC, and to JBS' credit, they were always very quick to reassure us that nothing would change. \"My pigs go to Diamond Valley. I don't have a contract with Rivalea or Diamond Valley, it's always been a handshake agreement and that's what it will be with JBS.\" Mr Kingma believes the JBS takeover will also increase Australia's share of processed pork smallgoods and meats. \"Because of their [JBS] background with smallgoods, the majority of the meat with our smallgoods and our hams isn't Australian, so hopefully we get more Aussies eating our pork,\" he said. In a statement, JBS said it had worked constructively with the ACCC and key customers to assure them that JBS intends to have a business as usual approach to the Rivalea operations. \"JBS will continue to provide kill services at DVP for customers and also grow the customer base,\" JBS Australia CEO Brent Eastwood said. \"We have provided this assurance directly to all DVP customers in writing, to local pork groups,\" he said. \"JBS has a long and proud history of supporting and growing its Australian businesses – investing heavily in its local operations and domestic brands, while at the same time providing employment opportunities and supporting the regional economies in which we operate. \"We will employ this same locally-minded approach at Rivalea.\" The takeover will now go before the Foreign Investment Review Board for approval."}, "/news/2021-12-02/love-on-spectrum-star-michael-theo-creates-new-podcast/100668646": {"description": "Love on the Spectrum star Michael Theo on fame, overcoming shyness and positive podcasting", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Michael Theo grew up thinking he was \"inferior to other people and invisible\". The Wollongong-based star of the hit TV show Love on the Spectrum would choose to be alone during school holidays. He knew he was different to everyone else, but he did not know why until his mother told him he had Asperger's syndrome when he was 13. \"Having Asperger's never really bothered me at all and it's something that I've always been proud of,\" he said. \"It's actually pretty great and it makes me stand out in a way.\" In his early teenage years he became more social and comfortable around people at school. He said he became \"surprisingly popular\" because he was likable. Having recently appeared as a guest on The Ellen DeGeneres Show after Love on the Spectrum became available on Netflix, his popularity has gone global. \"It was a very honourable experience,\" he said. \"I enjoyed meeting her [Ellen]. She's a really great person and I was surprised to find she wanted to interview me because I'm nowhere near as famous as Tom Hanks. \"It's [fame] flattering but it's also sort of overwhelming at times.\" Reality TV queen Kim Kardashian also shared screenshots of Love on the Spectrum to her 266 million Instagram followers, saying the show warmed her heart. \"The show changed my life in the way that it put me in the public eye and it made me well known in Australia and overseas,\" he said. \"I've been getting heaps of followers every day and getting a lot of messages from people about how much they love the show.\" The aspiring actor has recently launched his own podcast titled Mr A+. He once told his mother that his ideal \"A+\" partner looked like him, so she started calling him the name. \"I wanted to make a podcast because I wanted a way to entertain people and bring love and light into people's lives,\" he said. \"My rules for the podcast are there are several topics that are forbidden — religion, politics, weaponry, drugs, wars, crime, violence, and most importantly it's got a no-COVID-talk policy. \"Even I hate hearing that word.\" Love on the Spectrum is a documentary series following young adults on the autism spectrum as they explore the unpredictable world of love, dating and relationships. Given the pandemic has dominated the news cycle for nearly two years, the final rule seems appropriate. It could also be because the global pandemic has caused him some stress. \"I haven't been coping well because I take a lot of things seriously,\" he said. \"I see the pandemic as a threat to a lot of things and I hate being isolated from friends.\" He said the podcast has given him a chance to share his personality and interests with the world. It has also allowed him to interview some of his favourite people including actor Shane Jacobson, who has a child on the autism spectrum. \"The podcast is about positivity and bringing it into people lives because people really need it, especially after the dark couple of years we've had,\" he said. Sign up here."}, "/news/2021-12-02/police-investigate-assault-on-dymocks-staff-member/100668260": {"description": "Customer who knocked bookstore employee down escalator 'refused to show vaccine certificate'", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A Melbourne bookstore has hired professional security after a staff member working as a COVID-19 marshal was allegedly pushed down an escalator. The employee at Dymocks, in Melbourne's CBD, was briefly knocked unconscious in the incident after allegedly being pushed by a customer who refused to check in using a QR code and show his vaccine certificate. Afterwards, the staff member was found to have suffered a mild concussion and cuts to his back from tumbling down the escalator. Police are now investigating the alleged assault, which was caught on camera. A man wearing a distinctive hoodie with a rainbow pattern is seen pushing the staff member before walking past him and down the escalator. The owners of the store said it was one of three violent incidents linked to COVID-19 check-in requirements at the store on Friday. Dymocks Melbourne owner Melissa Traderso said the store had now hired security guards at a cost of around $4,000 per week. \"We've owned this book shop for 20 years and we've never had a physical assault against any staff member, but we had three in one day on Friday,\" she told ABC Radio Melbourne. In the other incidents, an elderly woman slapped a female employee, and a middle-aged businessman also shoved past a male staff member at the QR check-in.  \"Just have some respect for these poor, innocent people who are just doing their job,\" Ms Traderso said. Last week, Australian Retailers Association CEO Paul Zahra expressed concern at the rising number of incidents of abuse and aggression towards retail sector workers. \"Anything from a hot cup of coffee being thrown at staff to a shopping trolley being thrown at a staff member,\" he said. The Transport Workers Union said more needed to be done to protect its workers, after a bus driver was assaulted by a passenger who refused to wear a mask. That driver was taken to hospital with serious injuries after the assault near Kerang, in Victoria's north. Ms Traderso wants the Victorian government to provide more support to businesses trying to enforce the new rules. \"Our staff are not trained as security or as bouncers. We're not trained in conflict resolution. We're not trained in self defence,\" she said. \"The government haven't really given us any support in telling us how we are supposed to ensure that we do [meet] these requirements.\" She said the inconsistency across essential and non-essential businesses was also adding to the confusion for customers. \"There's certain customers that are just confused with the rules. You have to wear a mask in a retail environment but you don't have to wear a mask in the office now.\""}, "/news/rural/2021-12-02/days-of-dollar-homebrand-milk-are-long-gone/100664658": {"description": "Supermarket dollar milk war is now just a memory as prices steadily rise", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The cost of cheap supermarket milk has now hit $1.30 per litre after Woolworths, Coles, and Aldi all lifted prices in the last week. That means an extra 10 cents a litre consumers will now be forking out for homebrand two-litre and three-litre bottles. first increase by the retailers in more than two years The dairy industry has always rallied against cheap milk, which they argue has devalued its product since it was first introduced in 2011. While consumers may happily pay the extra 10 cents to support struggling dairy farmers, there is no guarantee that they will get any of it. Dairy cooperative Norco supplies Coles 60 million litres of milk, of the 226 million its farmers produce a year, for Coles branded milk. Norco CEO Michael Hampson said the decision was entirely up to Coles whether it passes on any of the extra 10 cents. \"We're certainly having a number of conversations with Coles in terms of where the 10 cents goes at the moment. We don't have any indication that that's going to form its way back to the farmgate milk price,\" he said. \"There have been notifications previously that have come out recently from retailers saying that they're adjusting their price based on previous price pressures, and that's probably where we'd see that one landing. He said in terms of pricing in the marketplace for farmgate, there had been flurry of activity at the start of the milk season, as everyone announced their prices on June 1 and adjusted those through June and July.  \"Certainly those items, I dare say, they have already made their way into the supply chain.\" Coles, which reported a $1.01 billion profit for 2020-21, will not confirm whether it will pass any of the 10-cent increase onto Norco and its suppliers. \"We have seen farmgate costs increase over the past two years, and Coles has previously absorbed these costs without impacting the retail price of Coles Brand milk,\" a spokesperson said. \"We believe that Coles Brand milk still represents great value for customers.\" Dairy lobby group eastAUSmilk said supermarkets needed to ensure suppliers are given a fair share of any increase. Shaughn Morgan, CEO of policy and advocacy, said supermarkets had a social licence and a responsibility at a corporate level to do so. \"I acknowledge that the increase in the price reflects the need to be reactive to issues around such a food staple,\" he said. Forget dollar a litre milk. The diary crisis has more to do with global trade wars than it does with cheap milk. \"But if that price is to go up, then supermarkets do have an obligation to ensure that part of that increase should flow down the value chain to the processor who can then discuss further increases in the farmgate price with their supplier.\" Mr Morgan urged the retailers to consider passing on the 10 cents to the farmers who supply the commodity. \"If it's just going to be maintained in consolidated revenue and for the benefit shareholder, of that particular supermarket chain, then it's not going to be of any benefit to those who are more deeply affected by these price increases in input costs,\" he said. While Aldi has confirmed it has lifted prices of its Farmdale Fresh Milk range, it has not confirmed if it would pass the 10 cents on. \"We remain focused on reviewing pricing for the whole dairy category on an ongoing basis,\" a spokesperson said \"Ultimately, we always want to deliver the best value for our customers while maintaining fair pricing with our supplier partners.\""}, "/news/2021-12-02/alec-baldwin-says-he-did-not-pull-the-trigger-shooting-rust/100668152": {"description": "'I didn't pull the trigger': Alec Baldwin breaks down during interview about film set death", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Actor Alec Baldwin says he did not pull the trigger on the prop gun which fired and killed a cinematographer on the set of the film, Rust. In an interview with the US ABC's George Stephanopoulos, which will be released on Thursday, Mr Baldwin denied being the one to pull the trigger. ABC released a clip on Wednesday showing Mr Baldwin breaking down in tears while describing Halyna Hutchins, the cinematographer who was killed on the set. Director Joel Souza was also injured. \"I didn't pull the trigger,\" Mr Baldwin said. \"I would never point a gun at anyone and pull the trigger at them. Never.\" It was Mr Baldwin's first sit-down interview since the October 21 shooting on the set of the western film, Rust. Authorities have said Mr Baldwin was told the gun was safe to handle, but they continue to investigate how a live round ended up in the weapon. Mr Baldwin was asked during his interview with Stephanopoulos how a live round ended up on the set. \"I have no idea,\" the actor said. \"Someone put a live bullet in a gun — a bullet that wasn't even supposed to be on the property.\" Investigators have described \"some complacency\" in how weapons were handled on the set. They have said it is too soon to determine whether charges will be filed, amid independent civil lawsuits concerning liability in the fatal shooting.  "}, "/news/2021-12-02/right-to-repair-and-consumers/100668064": {"description": "Right to repair laws may change after Productivity Commission recommendations", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Many of the everyday items we own have become more technologically advanced in recent years, from fridges to mobile phones to cars and even tractors. But our ability to repair them has become harder, with many companies insisting only the manufacturer is able to do so. That could all be about to change, with the Productivity Commission recommending the federal government amend laws to give consumers more rights. The Commission's 'Right to Repair' report, released on Wednesday, sets out a raft of recommendations that include changes to consumer and intellectual copyright laws.  \"It's a really strong message to government that there have serious problems for consumers in competition markets that need to be addressed,\" Professor Leanne Wiseman, an expert from Griffith University, said. \"It's the first inquiry that's addressed the broad range of issues that are involved in right to repair, which is the competition and consumer Law aspects, the intellectual property law aspects, as well as the product stewardship and E-waste aspects.\" Professor Wiseman said there were important recommendations about the right to repair medical devices.  \"What we saw in the United States with the COVID crisis was that we had broken ventilators in hospitals and they weren't able to be repaired,\" she said. \"So it was literally a life and death situation.\" Farmers have been fighting for a change to laws with agricultural machinery manufacturers like John Deere, prohibiting individuals or independent repairers from fixing things.  \"The scale and complexity of machinery has increased in the last decade and will only increase more,\" WA farmer Sue Middleton said.  \"It's a real cost issue for farmers and it's also just a time efficiency issue because if you can't solve a problem in a paddock, when you're trying to beat the rain or get the crop off, that becomes a real issue.\" It's a global problem with the right to repair movement across the world calling for mandates for manufacturers to create goods that are fixable. \"It basically puts you into a market monopoly situation,\" Ms Middleton said. \"What we were really seeking is that farmers, and or independent repairers, have the right to access the diagnostic information, and or the right to repair and get parts.\" The Productivity Commission agreed and said there '\"are significant and unnecessary barriers to repair for some products\".  The Commission also recommended warranty regulations be amended to include the right to remedies under consumer law to not require consumers to have previously used authorised repair services or repair parts. The Australian Consumer Law's guarantees mean you can get some faulty goods replaced even if they are out of warranty. It also recommended that Australia's consumer watchdog, the ACCC, be given greater powers, including the ability to enforce fines on companies that don't comply. \"A failure of a company to make good its consumer guarantee obligations, doesn't have a penalty associated with it,\" ACCC Deputy Chair Mick Keogh said. \"It would simply require the legislation to be amended to  include penalty provisions. \"And we wouldn't need any extra resources. In fact, it would make our job easier because we would then have some real enforcement potential.\" The Productivity Commission wants to see the recommendations implemented by the end of 2022. In a statement, Assistant Treasurer Michael Sukkar said he welcomed the report. \"Given the breadth of matters considered, the government will consider how the report's recommendations interact with existing policy to ensure costs and benefits are measured and appropriate and provide our response early next year.\" Farmer Sue Middleton hopes changes will be made before the next harvest. \"I think this is a really positive outcome. And I'm absolutely certain that the government will want to jump on this and get this in place as quickly as we can,\" she said."}, "/news/2021-12-02/asx-wallstreet-markets-stocks-currencies-commodities/100668070": {"description": "ASX regains some lost ground on takeover fight for Australian Pharmaceutical Industries", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australian shares regained most of their losses helped by banks, as Woolworths launched a takeover bid for Australian Pharmaceutical Industries to rival a competing bid by Wesfarmers.  The All Ordinaries fell nearly 1 per cent in the morning after Wall Street slumped in the last hour of trade on the news that COVID-19's Omicron variant had been detected in North America. By the close, the All Ordinaries index ended down 0.3 per cent, to 7,537, while the ASX 200 index fell 0.15 per cent, to 7,225. More sectors ended lower with technology, healthcare and miners leading the benchmark index down.  But a rise in utilities, consumer firms and financial stocks limited the losses. Some of the best performers on the ASX 200 were engineering giant Worley Parsons (+6.1pc), plumbing giant GUD Holdings (+3pc) in a reverse of yesterday's losses, and power firm AGL Energy (+4pc). Buy now, pay later firm Afterpay slumped (-6.1pc) after it delayed an investor meeting until early next year to vote on its takeover by payments giant, Square, pending regulatory approval in Spain. Square announced it had changed its name to Block as it seeks to rebrand and expand. Also going down were fellow tech firms Netwealth Group (-6.5pc) and Xero (-5.1pc). National Australia Bank is the last of the big four banks to raised fixed-term mortgage rates above 2 per cent. Its shares rose 0.8 per cent.  At 4:00pm AEDT, the Australian dollar was down 0.1 per cent to around 70.97 US cents, after falling more than 0.5 cents overnight.  The Bureau of Statistics said Australia's trade surplus narrowed in October, amid lower iron ore prices, and new home loans fell 2.5 per cent, seasonally adjusted, in October. At 4:00pm AEDT, spot gold fell 0.4 per cent an ounce to $1776.49 an ounce and Brent crude oil rose 1.2pc to $US69.62 a barrel, amid a big sell-off this week.  Woolworths has outbid Wesfarmers for Australian Pharmaceutical Industries.  The supermarket chain has offered $872 million for API, compared to the $764 million offered by Wesfarmers in a scheme of arrangement, and said it was open to other takeover structures. Woolworth's offer is worth $1.75 a share. API — the parent company of Priceline, Soul Pattinson Chemists and the Pharmacist Advice brands — \"The API Board notes that Woolworths has indicated it supports the current ownership provisions and location rules which ensure that community pharmacies are well distributed throughout the community,\" it told the ASX.  Woolworths chief executive Brad Banducci said it was a compelling offer. \"Health and wellness is a large, fast growing category and API would be a fantastic addition to our food and everyday needs ecosystem.\" However, the Pharmacy Guild of Australia questioned Woolworths' takeover bid.  A spokesperson for the Guild said it was monitoring the bid and examining any possible implications for community pharmacies and patients. \"Why is a company with interests in the alcohol, tobacco, gambling and nightclub industries wanting to move into healthcare?\" the spokesperson asked. \"We look forward to having many conversations with the Woolworths team as well as with Prime Minister Scott Morrison and Leader of the Opposition Anthony Albanese on these important questions.\" Last month, API signed a deal with Wesfarmers agreeing to its takeover bid.     Former Reserve Bank governor Glenn Stevens is set to become the chairman of investment bank Macquarie Group when current chairman Peter Warne retires next year.  Mr Stevens was appointed to Macquarie's board in November 2017 and chairs the board's risk committee.  Macquarie shares increased 1.5 per cent.  Disgraced casino operator Crown Resorts has again rejected a takeover offer from US private equity firm Blackstone. It said the $8.5 billion takeover bid of $12.50 a share was not high enough and was not  \"compelling value\" for investors.  However, it did open its books to Blackstone to undertake due diligence so it could raise its takeover bid.  \"The Crown Board has offered Blackstone the opportunity to access non-public information to allow Blackstone to undertake initial due diligence inquiries on a non-exclusive basis so it can formulate a revised proposal that adequately reflects the value of Crown,\" the company told the ASX.  Crown shares rose 0.7 per cent, reversing their earlier fall.  Premier Investments said retail sales rebounded last month as stores reopened in New South Wales, ACT, Victoria and New Zealand. Premier owns retail chains, including stationery seller Smiggle and fashion chain Portmans.  \"Premier Retail was able to open all stores globally for the first time this financial year, with sales up 10.1 per cent on the same three weeks last year.\"  Premier said it had to close more than half of its stores around the world for significant periods of time because of government-mandated COVID-19 shutdowns.  \"The Group  has lost over 42,000 trading days this financial year.\"  Sales for the 17 weeks to the end of November fell 3.5 per cent.  Premier shares lost 0.8 per cent. the Fair Work Ombudsman accused it of underpaying workers and launched legal action in the Federal Court. Stocks on Wall Street slumped in late trade in a volatile session with investors jittery about the latest COVID-19 variant, surging inflation and US Federal Reserve policy. The US Centers for Disease Control confirmed the first case of the Omicron COVID-19 variant had been detected in the country and that the person had returned from South Africa late last month. US central bank chief Jerome Powell said policymakers needed to be ready to respond to the possibility that inflation may not recede in the second half of next year as expected.  New York Life Investments economist and portfolio strategist Lauren Goodwin said it was not surprising to see volatility as investors digested substantial uncertainties, including the lack of information on the Omicron variant and the latest signals from the Federal Reserve, which were both \"potentially, major changes in market expectations\". However, investors were also reacting to strong private payroll and purchasing managers' data which reminded investors \"that the economic and corporate backdrop for this market is really strong\". \"For many investors, this volatility is a buying opportunity,\"  Ms Goodwin said. Figures showed that US manufacturing activity had picked up in November amid strong demand for goods, and private employers in the US hired 534,000 people with the latest official US unemployment figures out tomorrow.  The positive data saw the S&P 500 rise by nearly 2 per cent at one stage during the session.  By the close, the Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 1.3 per cent, to 34,022, the S&P 500 fell 1.2 per cent, to 4,513, and the Nasdaq fell 1.8 per cent, to 15,254. Utilities was the only sector to rise on the S&P 500 index, with the falls led by consumer and industrial stocks.  Merck lost its gains, despite a panel of advisers to the US Food and Drug Administration narrowly voting to recommend the agency authorise the pharmaceutical company's antiviral pill to treat COVID-19.  The World Health Organisation said it expected to have more information on the transmissibility of the Omicron variant within days, and that the agency believed the existing COVID-19 vaccines would work against the new variant.  Over in Europe, stocks rebounded from the previous day's losses.  In London, the FTSE 100 index rose 1.6 per cent, to 7,169, the DAX in Germany rose 2.5 per cent, to 15,473, and the CAC 40 in Paris put on 2.4 per cent, to 6,882.  Oil prices lost their gains after weekly fuel stockpiles rose in the US.  Brent Crude fell 0.3 per cent, to $US69.04 a barrel, and spot gold rose on concerns about Omicron to $US1779.37, up 0.3 per cent.   "}, "/news/2021-12-02/inner-west-light-rail-trams-out-of-warranty/100667702": {"description": "NSW Now: Sydney's cracked inner-west light rail trams out of warranty", "article_category": "business", "article_text": "   It has been revealed Sydney's inner-west fleet of cracked trams are no longer under warranty. The 12 trams that normally run on the Central to Dulwich Hill line were decommissioned last month after major cracking was found on the vehicles. Transport Minister Rob Stokes said taxpayers would not be out of pocket for the repairs but this morning Transport for NSW confirmed the trams were out of warranty. The warranty on the vehicles, which were built in Spain, expired between mid-2016 and mid-2017. Opposition Leader Chris Minns said the revelation cast doubt on Mr Stokes's promise taxpayers would not pay for the faults. \"There's a real fear that NSW taxpayers will be picking up the bill,\" he said. \"We need an answer to this because at the end of the day this Transport Department is not fit for purpose and not delivering for the people of the state.\" Thousands of commuters are being forced to use replacement buses while the trams are out of action for an estimated 18 months. A spokesperson for Transport for NSW said two of the organisation's workers were currently in Birmingham, in the UK, to inspect a tram repair facility at Transport for West Midlands (TfWM). \"[They will] use the knowledge, insight, and lessons learnt to inform the establishment of the Sydney repair facility,\" the spokesperson said. Transport for NSW, ALTRAC, Transdev and CAF are responsible for managing repairs of the Spanish fleet. Mr Stokes has been approached for comment. Small businesses struggling to get back on their feet after the COVID-19 lockdowns will continue to receive rent relief over the Christmas and New Year period.  NSW Treasurer Matt Kean said many small businesses were still not back to their pre-COVID turnover and rent was one of their biggest costs. \"Small business is the engine room of our economy and, as we recover from the pandemic, we need to make sure we leave no-one behind,\" he said. Eligible businesses with a turnover of less than $5 million will be able to claim rent relief until January 13 next year. The state government says it will adopt all recommendations of the NSW Chief Scientist on the protection of Sydney's largest koala population in the Cumberland Plain. The 31 recommendations were delivered earlier this year as part of the Cumberland Plain Conservation Plan, which spans eight local government areas in Sydney's west. In a statement, Planning Minister Rob Stokes says the plan has been updated to protect additional habitat and ensure wildlife corridors are suitable for koala movement. The document is expected to be finalised next year. The Greens are calling on the NSW Environment Minister to intervene to prevent the felling of hundreds of mature trees at The Royal Sydney Golf Club in Rose Bay.  Woollahra Council's Local Planning Panel is due to make a decision this month on whether to approve a redevelopment application by the club that would involve felling hundreds of trees on the site. \"The loss of more than 500 beautiful, mature trees will be a devastating blow to the local community and wildlife, \" Greens MP Shoebridge said. The Royal Sydney Golf Club said the trees were \"reaching the end of their safe life expectancy\" and the plan would return the area to pre-European heathland. Bus drivers in Sydney's inner west went on strike for two hours this morning in a dispute over pay and conditions. Drivers stopped work from 4am to 6am.  The Rail, Tram and Bus Union claims that privatisation has created a two-tier system whereby drivers on private contracts are paid less and work longer days than drivers who are former government employees.  Further industrial action is planned on Friday between 5pm and 7pm, followed by a 24-hour stoppage on Monday. The union said the stoppages had been timed to ensure that HSC students could travel safely to and from school in the final week of exams.  NSW Police Deputy Commissioner Gary Worboys has announced his retirement after 40 years in the police force. A dinner was held to celebrate his career at the NSW Police Academy in Goulburn last night. Deputy Commissioner Worboys focused a lot of his efforts on prevention and investigation of crime in rural and regional NSW and also implemented a campaign to raise the Aboriginal flag in front of all NSW police stations and buildings. He also worked as the State Emergency Operations Controller during the bushfires and COVID-19 response. Deputy Commissioner Worboys will mark his final day of operational service at the end of the month. Hundreds of COVID-19 swabs collected over the past two weeks from travellers who had been in southern Africa are to be retested to check for Omicron infections. Six cases of the Omicron variant have been detected in New South Wales. A man in his 40s is isolating at his home in Cabramatta in western Sydney after arriving on a flight from Doha last Thursday. He was the second passenger from the flight to test positive for Omicron. NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard has expressed concern that the man was \"out and about\" in the community before he tested positive. Health authorities revealed he visited a Chemist Warehouse at The Grove in Liverpool on Monday evening between 8:10pm and 8:15pm. Partly cloudy. Sydney  17 26 Parramatta  15 27"}, "/news/2021-12-02/migrant-engineers-overlooked-for-work-and-jobs-report-says/100665902": {"description": "Qualified engineers 'working as Uber drivers' despite huge increase in job vacancies, report says", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " At the end of a long day, Yaning Tang still has work to do at his company's workshop in Ingleburn in Sydney's outer west. There is sheet metal to be hammered and air conditioning units to be prepared for installation in the coming days.  Mr Tang likes his employer and the work. But he wants to be doing much more. \"If I say I'm satisfied with my present job, I'm lying, because, you know, I'm an engineer,\" he said. Mr Tang came to Australia in 2019 with a wealth of engineering experience in China. For more than decade he managed more than 100 workers on building projects and helped design air conditioning and heating systems for hotels and apartment buildings. None of that meant anything when he applied for engineering jobs here. \"During the process of application in Australia, I found nobody cared about that. I don't know why,\" he said. \"That's really frustrating to me … I really lost confidence. That's a very tough experience for me.\" More than 100 email applications brought only one offer: a job delivering air conditioning units to job sites. Eventually he moved to his current position as an AC installer. It's far removed from his role managing big engineering projects in China. \"I want to feel appreciated and valued in Australia,\" he said. Mr Tang is part of what Engineers Australia says is a largely untapped asset in Australia: qualified migrant engineers who cannot get jobs in their field. A report from the peak body found 47 per cent of migrant engineers looking for work are unemployed. More than a third who do find jobs in engineering are underemployed, working at jobs below their experience and skill level. \"They're working as Uber drivers, they're working in the limited hospitality areas that are available, or they're unemployed,\" Engineers Australia chief executive Bronwyn Evans said. All of this is happening while demand for engineers soars. more than $200 billion in government-backed infrastructure projects launching over the next four years \"You've sort of got this perfect confluence of big projects coming online, almost double the demand for engineers,\" Dr Evans said. \"And yet we've got this pool of engineers who are ready to work and can't find work.\" The Engineers Australia report found the biggest barrier to employment was a phrase many migrant professionals are all too familiar with: local experience. \"When someone's looking for their ideal engineer, they want them ready with local experience. They want them ready with local networks. They want them ready with local knowledge. Now that's hard when you're coming to Australia for the first time,\" Dr Evans said. Andrea Gonzalez came to Australia with an engineering degree in 2006 and left after failing to land a job. She worked in engineering for three years in her native Colombia and then returned. \"What I found is still they were asking for local experience. But how can I get local experience [if they] don't give me the opportunity? So I decided to do a master's,\" she said. At first her master's engineering degree from the University of New South Wales didn't help. \"I again applied for many jobs and it was very, very difficult. I always was rejected,\" she said. \"It was very stressful. I think your self-confidence can get very low, because … I'm qualified, I study, I found the passion, I want to work, but they don't give me the opportunity.\" Ms Gonzalez persisted, and eventually landed an internship that led to a job offer. After completing a PhD she now has a senior role as an engineering consultant. Nearly 60 per cent of the 106,000 members of Engineers Australia were born overseas. And the Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia (FECCA) believes the barriers they face are familiar for all migrants in the job market. \"I think COVID has shown us how important migrants are to Australia's economy, especially skilled migrants,\" FECCA chief executive Mohammad Al-Khafaji said. \"I think that the problem that Australia has is, unfortunately, unconscious bias to do with migrants. \"Around people's accents … where they come from. And just generally, we're not aware that some of those biases have a role to play when it comes to hiring.\" Bronwyn Evans believes Engineers Australia can help migrant applicants overcome some of those biases with its Pathways to Employment program. \"I think some of those societal issues do play out,\" she said. \"What we've got to do is give people an understanding of how do you engage in the Australian job market? Where do you go to look for roles?\" Sometimes migrants might not be looking in the right place. The ABC spoke to one engineering firm that's been searching to fill two positions for months. It's posted vacancies online and received no responses. As for Yaning Tang, after hundreds of applications in the last two years, he plans to keep going. It's worth fighting to return to engineering. \"I feel very proud of what I have done before,\" he said. \"I want to contribute to the society, to the industry, to the community. And I think if I got a suitable chance, I can do that.\""}, "/news/2021-12-02/obeid-backed-development-at-hawks-nest-to-face-legal-challenge/100623232": {"description": "Aboriginal-owned beachside land was sold to developers for $1.5m and will be soon be valued at $6m. They want it back", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Plans for a controversial apartment development in the beachside town of Hawks Nest, secretly backed by the family of corrupt NSW politician Eddie Obeid, are set to be challenged in court by traditional owners. Shai Richardson, the interim chief executive of the Karuah Local Aboriginal Land Council, said her community wanted to regain ownership of the two beachside plots sold for $1.5 million in 2018. That price did not take into account the likelihood that one of the plots would be rezoned to accommodate a medium density apartment development. land above $6 million — a massive windfall for the developers. \"I want to get that land back into the hands of its rightful owners and make sure it is used for the right purpose,\" said Ms Richardson. \"To do this we are exploring all our legal options\". For any legal challenge to be successful it would need to show there was wrongdoing during the process to sell the land between December 2016 and late 2018. Ms Richardson said many in the Karuah community believed at the time that the land was being sold to the neighbouring Hawks Nest Golf Club rather than developers who were planning to build 140 apartments on the site. Karuah elder Venessa Saunders said the land sale was approved without the full support of the community. \"The board [at the time] was making decisions on behalf of community, not consulting the community. And that's where the breakdown was,\" she told Four Corners. An investigation by Four Corners rejected a development application for the Port Macquarie apartment complex The Joint Regional Planning Panel cited the size of the proposed development, its effect on neighbouring properties and the visual impact on the wider area in making its decision. \"We are delighted at the result,\" said Carole Field, who lives next to the proposed development. There is also growing public anger around the proposed Hawks Nest development, which has seen more than 24,000 people sign a petition against the project. Local MP Kate Washington has also tabled a \"Notice of Motion\" in the NSW parliament calling on Planning Minister Rob Stokes to \"urgently review\" the development given the \"strong opposition\" from the community and \"in light of the Four Corners program\". The public anger comes ahead of local council elections on December 4. The 140-apartment development and the Obeid family's involvement has become a major election issue as candidates square off over the proposal. Mid Coast councillor Len Roberts was chief executive of the Karuah Local Aboriginal Land Council when a 1.4-hectare beachside plot was sold to developers for $600,000 in October 2018. A second parcel of 10 hectares was sold to the same developers for $900,000. Len Roberts then authored a cultural heritage report for the developers and twice voted in favour of the proposal as a Mid Coast councillor. He left the room during the final vote to re-zone the land in April this year. Mr Roberts has strongly denied any conflict of interest around the development and accused his opponents of trying to make \"political mileage\" out of the issue. local media interviews \"One of the things I was charged to do, was to start selling land to get the land council out of its financial trouble,\" he told the Great Lakes Advocate and Manning River Times. This claim of \"financial trouble\" has been denied by the NSW Aboriginal Land Council, which oversees local land councils. \"Our records indicate that Karuah Local Aboriginal Land Council (KLALC) was not in financial difficulty at the time of the transaction, nor was KLALC's financial position a motivating factor in its decision to sell,\" it said in a statement. The Karuah Land Council's financial report from June 2017 – the year the land sale was agreed – shows it had a cash surplus of $60,000 and assets of more than $6 million. Untouched beaches and native wildlife are why Hawks Nest residents love their home. All of that could change if the Obeid family get their way. Mr Roberts told local media the combined sale price of $1.5 million was double the valuation placed on the two plots of land. This valuation did not take into account that the beachside parcel of land would most likely be re-zoned. While a development application is yet to be lodged, the current plan is for the construction of more than 140 apartments, which will see the value of the land climb above $6 million, a massive windfall for the developers. Mr Roberts told 2GB radio the parcel was always going to be re-zoned once it was transferred from Crown land to the Aboriginal Land Council. \"It has to be re-zoned and it has to be re-zoned to the land zoning adjacent to the land, which [in this case] is medium density,\" he said. The sale of the land and the proposed development figured prominently at a public meeting in Hawks Nest last Saturday evening, organised by rival local councillor Peter Epov. \"People are very angry. The public outrage is absolutely overwhelming,\" he said. Mr Epov told Four Corners the sale price of $600,000 was like \"winning Powerball\" for the developers. He is now urging residents to write to NSW Planning Minister Rob Stokes, who is responsible for giving final approval to the re-zoning. Planning Minister Rob Stokes said in a statement: \"As the council has finalised the proposal, neither the Minister nor the Department can intervene.\" Legal advice obtained by local residents questions this statement and a separate petition has been lodged with the NSW parliament in an effort to have the matter debated in the lower house. To achieve this, 20,000 signatures must be obtained. One of the companies which purchased the land at Hawks Nest is the Leric Group, whose sole director is Merwin \"Memo\" Ibrahim. He is also a director of the company that owns the development site at Pacific Drive in Port Macquarie. Mr Ibrahim is a long-standing family friend of the Obeids and in a statement to Four Corners said he had been a personal friend of Gerard and Eddie Junior since he was 18 years old. Mr Ibrahim was also a founding shareholder of Laurus Projects, which is developing the project at Pacific Drive. Eddie Jnr works with Laurus Projects, according to his email address. \"I consult to them … when you consult for someone, they give you an email address,\" he told Four Corners. Eddie Obeid's fourth son Gerard, lives next door to the Pacific Drive development and lodged a submission in support of increasing height and density limits in the area. Mr Ibrahim denied having any business dealings with the Obeid family. \"I have no business with any of the Obeid family. Never ever,\" he told Four Corners in a statement. Gerard and Eddie Jr did not respond to written questions about the family's involvement in Pacific Drive or Hawks Nest. The head of Laurus Projects told Four Corners the Obeid family has no involvement in the Pacific Drive development."}, "/news/rural/2021-12-02/champagne-shortage-has-sparkling-wine-makers-ready/100629934": {"description": "Champagne more expensive but local sparkling makers say their bubbles are just as good ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australia is in the midst of a champagne shortage and there is no chance of summer discounts or bulk deals this year, according to local importers. Australians are consistently among the top ten per capita consumers of champagne, and just as the country heads into its peak drinking season, local sparkling wine producers are ready to pounce on a thirsty market. They are keen to assure drinkers their fizz is just as good as the imported product. \"For bottles that are in that $30-$50 area, when that cork comes off it's pretty hard to tell the difference,\" said Yering Station senior winemaker Brendan Hawker. Like many Australian cold climate wineries, Yering Station in Victoria's Yarra Valley uses the \"méthode champenoise\", or traditional method of making sparkling wine, the only permitted process for making champagne. \"It's definitely better wine when it's produced that way,\" Mr Hawker said. Last, year the Comité Interprofessionnel du vin de Champagne (CIVC), a committee that determines how much champagne is produced each year, slashed production as the world grappled with lockdowns. It declared the maximum permitted grape yield at 8,000 kilograms per hectare — producing nearly 230 million bottles — down from the 10,000kg/ha declared in 2019. Then just as the rest of the world started to open up, severe frosts wiped off anywhere between 30-40 per cent of the 2021 vintage, leaving the entire world short on fizz. \"[The CIVC] thought they were doing the right thing. It turns out if they had just let things go and let that bumper crop of 2020 come through it would have been enough champagne for everyone\", said United Cellars senior buyer Mark Faber. \"Now, with the way global logistics are, getting a container of wine from Champagne or from anywhere in Europe is pretty much a three-month exercise.\" Dan Murphy's, Liquorland, and First Choice Liquor have restricted sales of famous brands like Möet, Louis Roederer, Mumm, and Pol Roger, among others. Endeavour Group, which owns Dan Murphy's, said the stock limit of 12 bottles per person on certain brands \"is to ensure all our customers have access to these champagnes all the way throughout the festive season\". \"There are more than 200 different champagnes to choose from in Dan Murphy's stores and there will be promotions on champagne lines that we have sufficient stock of in the lead up to Christmas,\" an Endeavour Group spokeswoman said. Emperor Champagne CEO Kyla Kirkpatrick said there was going to be some shortages, particularly of well known brands. \"You're probably going to have to diversify the brands you drink this summer,\" she said. Australian sparkling winemakers know they still have to work to convince more Australians their local bubbles are just as good as champagne. Accolade Wines, which owns Grant Burge, Yarraburn, Croser, and Bay of Fires among many others in Australia, New Zealand, and around the world, is the ultimate owner of a sparkling label that produced the best sparkling wine in the world in 2020. Decanter Magazine's 2020 tasting bestowed that honour on Tasmania's House of Arras. \"I think the Australian consumer is a dual-drinker, so they'll drink champagne but they'll also drink Australian — or specifically Tasmanian — sparkling,\"  said Accolade CEO Robert Foye. \"They can get equal quality on the Australian and Tasmanian side.\" But the champagne diehards are not as easily convinced. \"Champagne is in a league of its own and if you don't believe me then just look at how much people are willing to pay for champagne,\" Mr Faber said. Ms Kirkpatrick and Mr Faber both hosted events recently entertaining small, but high-paying audiences of champagne fans obsessed with the history of the houses that produce it, the region, and culture surrounding champagne. \"I'm not convinced those that are on a champagne journey will just swap over to local sparkling wine,\" Ms Kirkpatrick said. As global sales of champagne plummeted in 2020, Australia imported 10 per cent more than it did in 2019. \"This trend has happened before. There is a correlation which is really quite interesting between a global economic crisis and an increase in champagne sales,\" Ms Kirkpatrick said. \"Is this a classic exacerbation of the rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer? \"I don't know, but we certainly do see increases in affordable luxury items selling during times of economic crisis.\" And it is not just champagne. \"Caviar sales were through the roof. My neighbour is [with] Watches of Switzerland and his sales were through the roof. \"So maybe people aren't taking luxury holidays, they might not be buying that car, but they certainly are trading up to more expensive champagnes.\""}, "/news/2021-12-02/australian-mango-now-being-grown-in-spain/100658054": {"description": "Lady Jane in Spain: The Australian mango enjoying sweet success internationally", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A mango variety that was developed in the Northern Territory is now being grown and sold commercially in Spain.  back in 2013. While a handful of growers are now busy harvesting this variety around Katherine and in Far North Queensland — it's overseas where this beautiful mango is really taking off. \"There's now more commercial plantings [of this mango variety] in Spain than there is in Australia,\" said consultant Richard Byllaardt, a long-time friend of Mr Rayner. \"The first commercial crop has been harvested this year in Spain and they're very happy with it. \"They don't call it Lady Jane, it's being sold under the Ibérica Fresh brand.\" Mr Byllaardt said the mangoes were being grown in the Alicante region of Spain under protective netting. \"The beauty of growing mangoes in Spain, is that they're basically picked and sold within 24 hours, compared to Katherine in the NT where mangoes are picked, but take four days to get to a customer. \"So it makes it easier for them to pick the fruit at the ultimate time. They can pick fruit that's ready to eat.\" Ken Rayner recently celebrated his 90th birthday in Katherine. He said it was great to see his mangoes being accepted by other countries. \"It's taken the best part of 20 years to reach this point [with Lady Jane mangoes],\" he said. \"It's been a long, hard slog but well worth it in the end. \"I've been breeding mangoes of various types for years and this is the first one that's really made the grade.\"  Mr Byllaardt said after decades of hard work, the humble Mr Rayner deserved all of the praise coming his way. \"I think this mango [Lady Jane] is about to take off around the world,\" he said. \"These mangoes are also being trialled in South Africa, along with 14 other varieties Ken has sent them. \"More than 10 countries around the world, such as Brazil, Israel Morocco, Egypt, USA, have all got PBR (Plant Breeders Rights] registrations and recognised Ken's exclusive mango and have started trials. \"So I think in five years, Ken's mangoes are going to be fairly well known around the world.\" Last year, Mr Rayner received the Medal of the Order of Australia (OAM) for his service to horticulture and decades of work cultivating new mango varieties. "}, "/news/2021-12-02/australia-super-funds-responsible-investment-high-returns-report/100667284": {"description": "'Well-run ethical super funds are getting pretty good returns' and now beating traditional funds", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australian superannuation funds that invest responsibly are becoming increasingly profitable, according to a new study from the non-profit Responsible Investment Association Australasia (RIAA). The research released today found the average performance of leading responsible investment funds outperformed traditional super funds in their default products over 3-year (+0.87pc), 5-year (+0.74pc) and 7-year (+0.56pc) time frames. The report stopped short of showing a longer-term performance gap due to the lack of data. A responsible investment super fund means that a fund is managed with a demonstrated commitment to good governance and accountability, and with a high degree of transparency and a greater gender-balanced board, according to the RIAA. Responsible investment is an overarching but not yet universal term, and can overlap with descriptions such as ethical investment. However, they both adopted measures such as environmental, social and governance (ESG) criteria from the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals. \"What this report really shows us is this significant momentum by Australia's leading super funds to become much more sophisticated in how they consider in sustainability issues,\" the RIAA's chief executive officer Simon O'Connor told the ABC. \"To deliver really strong investment outcomes for members, they need to be invested in a way that is considering the long-term challenges to our society, whether that'd be climate change, human rights or equity issues.\" The report found Australian super funds are improving their responsible investment practices, with 42 per cent of total super assets in Australia covered by funds with such practices in 2020. But the number of leading responsible investment super funds remained unchanged, at 13 out of 53 companies, in both 2019 and 2020. They are Active Super, Australian Ethical Super, AustralianSuper, Aware Super, BT Superannuation, CareSuper, Cbus, Christian Super, HESTA, Mercer Superannuation (Australia) Limited, Rest, UniSuper and Vision Super. The research also found that in the face of rising public concern and increasing financial materiality of climate change, 92 per cent of funds indicated that climate risk is actively assessed at a trustee or a board level in 2020, up from 74 per cent in 2019 and 64 per cent in 2018. And, for the first time, responsible investment approaches were influencing strategic asset allocation for more than half (55 per cent) of super funds in 2020, up from 39 per cent in 2019. Have you been thinking about switching your super around?  Mr O'Connor said the super industry had been \"maturing\" and Australians were choosing super funds based on how well they tackled sustainability issues. \"This is really starting to shape finance and really ensuring that the leading super funds are [beginning] to respond to Australians' desires,\" he said. \"It's much clearer to those who are managing super funds that if we fail to take a strong stance on climate change, if we failed to shift our economy to be in line with the net zero [target] by 2050 trajectory, then this is going to result in our economy struggling and failing and the returns of our retirement savings.\" The super industry has grown its size significantly in recent decades. It is now a major component of household assets and Australia's financial system. It represented $3.3 trillion, equal to 160 per cent of GDP as of June 30, 2021, according to the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA). Historically, there was a perception that \"a super fund has to sacrifice returns if it invests ethically\", but that is changing. \"A view of the time which turned out to be very naive,\" Alex Dunnin, director of research at Rainmaker, told the ABC. \"Well-run ethical supers are actually getting pretty good returns, and sometimes they can do better.\" Nowadays, super funds with high-level responsible investment are among the best funds in the country. Mr Dunnin said the responsible investment approach can help a super fund achieve good long-run investment returns, but there is still no guarantee. The \"name and shame\" list of super funds is designed to make Australians more aware. \"For example, of the 13 super funds the RIAA report identifies as being 'leading responsible investment super funds', two failed the 2021 super fund performance test run by the superannuation regulator APRA and some others have achieved lower-than-average returns,\" he explained. \"There is no reason why being a responsible investor detracts from returns, but it’s equally true that a super fund being a responsible investor doesn’t guarantee high returns either.\" Mr Dunnin said although he supports the responsible or ethical investment approach in general, funds that claim to be \"responsible\" need to have a greater transparency. \"Many super funds proclaim a commitment to net-zero, but it’s not always clear how those funds intend delivering on that commitment,\" he said, adding they included some of the leading funds. \"Talking the talk is easy, walking the walk is much harder.\" That echoes a key finding in the study, which is that the majority (77 per cent) of Australia's largest super funds need to improve their transparency if they are to meet new legislative requirements to disclose their portfolio holdings publicly in 2022. Mr Dunnin said super fund members should steer clear of funds that invest ideologically and that get tangled up in the politics. \"It's not the job of your super fund to be investing ideologically in a way that actually suits the politics of the trustees,\" he said. \"But what the research shows us is super funds can do both, they can invest smartly for me, they can invest in a really socially responsible manner, and it can make me lots of money.\""}, "/news/2021-12-01/nsw-flood-damage-could-cost-more-than-1b/100665376": {"description": "NSW flood damage bill tipped to exceed $1b as farmers watch crops go under", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The cost of the New South Wales floods could exceed $1 billion after record November rain in the state. The NSW Department of Primary Industries (DPI) is assessing the damage, but downgrades in the quality of crops and damage to fences and equipment are likely to be significant. DPI emergency coordinator Simon Oliver said the scale could be greater than the flooding in 2016 and that the damage to crops would hurt farmers the most. This year's yield was set to be bigger than 2016's. \"It's going to take a while to get a true figure, but the damage in that event was over a billion dollars,\" Mr Oliver said. \"So when you add infrastructure and roads, the council damage bill could be at that level or even higher.\" Growers are struggling to get into the paddock to assess the damage and some may not be able to harvest at all. \"If it continues to rain, as has been forecast in some places, it's going to be impossible to get a harvester in,\" Mr Oliver said. These images show the impact of floodwaters inundating the saturated plains of the NSW north-west, cutting off towns and submerging crops. Dairy farmers have got problems with fodder crops and pastures. \"We are already seeing some problems with yield,\" Mr Oliver said. \"A lot of lucerne and fodder crops have been under water for days.\" But the news was not all bad — Mr Oliver said farmers had moved livestock early and the department had not received many calls for assistance. \"We have had to do some mustering jobs by air to push stock out of the water,\" he said. \"There's been a few fodder drops, but in the main people have done a really great job in moving large stock out of harm's way.\" Farmers can get assistance by calling 1300 795 299. Gunnedah grain grower Chris Mammen's wheat paddocks have been flooded a number of times. Invisible to us mere mortals on the ground, the atmosphere is full of giant circulations which transport, mix and disperse air and energy around the world. He is expecting to lose hundreds of dollars a tonne when he finally harvests the crop, which has been standing in water for a week or more. \"If we can get it off it will all be downgraded and probably drop in yield too,\" Mr Mammen said. \"Some of this could have been worth upwards of $800 to $1,000 dollars a tonne for me, but now it is feed [grade] and will go under $200 a tonne.\" Boggabri farmer and agronomist Robert Weinthal says much of the local wheat crop will be downgraded significantly. \"There's some pretty ugly sights, to be honest, in terms of where the crops were at and what they're looking like now,\" he said. \"It's hard to say how much damage really has been done. \"It will be a lot — there's no denying that.\" But Mr Weinthal is optimistic that some summer plantings will pull through. \"There's a lot of summer crop you could see from the air, some advanced sorghum and corn, that's really enjoying life,\" he said."}, "/news/2021-12-01/wa-govt-to-spend-185m-on-attracting-students-tourists-workers/100664516": {"description": "New $185m package to lure tourists, students, workers back to WA when the borders open", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The state government has announced $185 million in measures to boost businesses and attract tourists, international students and workers to Western Australia when the state's borders reopen. Premier Mark McGowan told a business lunch the Reconnect WA plan would \"ensure that WA businesses can succeed as we safely transition our borders.\" He said \"at this point\" the transition plan to open borders was still proceeding, but the government would listen closely to advice on the new Omicron strain of COVID-19 at next week's National Cabinet meeting. Eighty per cent of the state's population aged over 12 is expected to be fully vaccinated against COVID-19 before the end of next week. The vaccination rate currently stands at 87.1 per cent first dose and 76.2 per cent second dose for over-12s. But the Premier said the state could not simply ease its border controls and expect tourists, airlines, students and workers to come flooding back. \"Our Reconnect WA package is designed as an immediate boost to ensure Western Australian businesses and industries have the competitive edge when we warmly welcome back vaccinated travellers,\" he said. The package focuses on international education, airlines, tourism and sourcing skilled labour. It includes $65 million for re-establishing pre-COVID flight routes to Perth and securing new direct routes to Perth from countries such as Germany, India, China and Vietnam.  There will also be $10 million for more intrastate flights. In an effort to brand WA as a safe destination, $65 million will be spent on marketing the state to international students, international and interstate tourists, and tourism agents. \"In addition, we will grow our campaigns to attract workers to WA with specific approaches for: crucial public sector workers like health staff and secondary teachers; skilled workers for industry, and; backpackers for hospitality and agriculture,\" Mr McGowan said. To compete with other states, there will also be incentives to attract those students, workers and tourists. The 'Stay and Play' campaign which offers discounts and vouchers for those that stay in participating hotels will be expanded. The Government will also spend more to attract sporting events, such as visits from European Football and the UFC, as well as business events, to help fill Perth hotel rooms, bars and restaurants. \"There are many who will be shocked by the inevitable drop in business when our borders ease and Western Australians can travel abroad once more - contrary to what some people may expect,\" Mr McGowan said. \"So we must act now, to attract the necessary visitors to fill the gap.\"  The Tourism Council WA said the Reconnect WA package was a good start but more funding would be needed to compete with other states also investing in attracting tourists, events and workers. Council chief executive Evan Hall said it was critical the package was extended to help businesses recover from the effects of the pandemic and ongoing travel restrictions. However, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry said the package was the booster the economy needed, \"especially for industries that have found the going particularly tough through this pandemic\"."}, "/news/2021-12-01/tel-aviv-most-expensive-city-cost-of-living/100666572": {"description": "Tel Aviv named the world's most expensive city", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Last year, Tel Aviv was the fifth-most expensive city in the world to live in.  But the Economist Intelligence Unit's (EIU) latest Cost of Living survey says the Israeli city is now the costliest on the planet.  The EUI's World Wide Cost of Living Report First off, the Israeli currency,  And while the average price increase was fairly tame at 1.6 per cent, the EUI says  Among those steep increases were groceries, transport and alcohol (booze prices in Tel Aviv are the second-highest in the world). the pandemic is at least partly to blame The EIU survey works by comparing the prices of 200 products and services — such as food prices, utility bills and transport costs — across 173 cities globally.  Those prices are converted into the US dollar as a central currency and weighted individually so they can be compared easily.    The general trend was for developed Asian cities and European capitals to take out the top spots, with North American and Chinese cities being \"relatively moderately priced\".  Here are the cities in order of most expensive to least expensive:  The EIU says  The Syrian capital was at the very bottom of seven of the EIU's 10 pricing categories and very close to the bottom in the other three categories. Here's the list of cities from cheapest to more expensive: We don't have their official ranking in comparison to other global cities, but here's how they ranked for Australia. It's probably no surprise that Sydney's the most expensive: "}, "/news/2021-12-01/alex-84-evicted-after-collapse-of-sterling-group-housing-scheme/100662296": {"description": "Alex, 84, is being evicted from his home after the collapse of a housing scheme", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Alex Tufekcic, 84, is packing a lifetime of memories into boxes as he prepares to be evicted. Mr Tufekcic and his wife Leonie are being forced to move out in just over a week, on her birthday. \"A lovely little present for a lady that has been helping people as a nurse all her life, now she is being kicked to live on the street,\" Mr Tufekcic told the ABC's 7.30 program. The stress of trying to find an affordable rental where they live in Mandurah, Western Australia, is immense. \"We [have] had two and a half years of hell, my marriage almost broke down the other day,\" he said. Mr Tufekcic was told he could enjoy a comfortable retirement by signing up to a scheme called Sterling New Life.  The Perth-based Sterling Group marketed Sterling New Life as the \"smart way to retire\". Mr Tufekcic never imagined he was at risk of becoming homeless when he paid more than $200,000 to secure a long-term lease on a house. He is one of more than 100 mainly elderly people across the country who signed up, paying more than $18.7 million in total. But in June 2019 Sterling Group collapsed, leaving those customers facing eviction and the loss of their life savings. Mr Tufekcic and his wife recently lost a court case brought against them by their landlord over unpaid rent since the collapse. \"Anger, what else could I be [feeling]?,\" Mr Tufekcic said. Victims of the the Sterling Group collapse held large protests where they lobbied for a Senate inquiry, and they got one. The inquiry began two weeks ago. One focus is ASIC's oversight of the managed investment scheme that underpinned the housing product, called the Sterling Income Trust. Corporate regulator ASIC told the inquiry it was investigating suspected criminal misconduct related to the collapse of Sterling Group, and had referred the matter to the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions to consider possible charges. Victims claim the regulator was too slow to act on concerns about Sterling Group, and could have launched an enforcement investigation earlier to protect them. Barrister and former ASIC investigator Niall Coburn believes the regulator should have done more. \"ASIC is under an enormous amount of strain and pressure ... [because] this is a case of regulatory catastrophe,\" Mr Coburn said. \"This is the highest degree of harm you can ever have in Australia, where elderly Australians are now without a home.\" When pressed by the Senate committee about whether ASIC should apologise to victims, ASIC chair Joe Longo declined, arguing the facts did not support that and the regulator had taken appropriate action when it had the evidence. \"Of course I regret that these people have lost their savings in connection with this mess,\" he told the inquiry.  \"I'm sort of reluctant to just blatantly apologise, because that is something that I think is inappropriate in all of these circumstances.\" Despite that, ASIC conceded it should have moved more quickly, and said in future when it acts it needs to be more energetic in publicising what it has done to ensure the public finds out. The inquiry is shedding new light on the actions of ASIC, and much of that information came from the regulator itself in a detailed submission which included a timeline of key dates, previously confidential documents, and two days of evidence. Mr Longo told the inquiry Sterling Group placed customers — who he called \"tenant-investors\" — in arrangements that were \"novel, complex and high risk\". Documentation given to them was more than 100 pages in length, and was so complex it would be difficult for an experienced lawyer to understand. The millions of dollars they paid into the Sterling Income Trust was put into property-related investments that were meant to cover the rent. Former Sterling New Life customer Alan Fardoe gave evidence to the inquiry. He told 7.30 that when he signed up he did not understand that he was considered an investor and that his money could be at risk. \"This is our life savings we're playing with,\" he told 7.30.  \"We didn't think we were investing it, we thought we were buying a 40-year lease.\" The Senate requested ASIC supply confidential internal documents to the inquiry. One document is a 34-page internal overview marked: \"Sensitive: Confidential/Privileged.\" It shows that in June 2015 an ASIC staff member raised concerns about misleading or deceptive conduct in relation to financial products, based off a newspaper ad they saw. ASIC reviewed the ad and a Sterling website, but did not take further action \"because the conduct did not appear to involve a financial product\". Retirees Pam and Michael Hellen were devastated to find they would be excluded from a federal government proposal for a long-awaited compensation scheme for victims of companies that go broke. Other misconduct complaints shortly afterwards were also dismissed. ASIC maintained at the inquiry that these complaints did not require further action.  Red flags were also raised with ASIC in March 2017 by Western Australia's Consumer Protection office, which had sent undercover officers to a free Sterling seminar. ASIC's internal record shows the WA regulator told ASIC it was concerned insufficient information was being supplied about Sterling New Life, and it was \"ringing alarm bells\". Consumer Protection was also worried about whether the money invested in the Sterling Income Trust would cover rental payments for tenants and investors over an extended period which fell outside its jurisdiction. Despite that, ASIC waited more than a year, until May 2018, to launch a formal investigation and start to ring Sterling's customers, including Alan Fardoe. \"In June 2018, I received a phone call from an ASIC investigative officer who was after documentation around the lease and the contracts we signed,\" he told 7.30.  \"And I asked him the question, 'Does this mean that our money's in jeopardy?' \"He said, 'It's too early to tell because we've only just started the investigation.'\" ASIC's internal overview records that \"elderly investors had little if no understanding that they were making an investment\", and \"they mostly had no understanding there was any risk their money could be lost and in some instances, they were told their money was placed into a trust account\". Former ASIC investigator Niall Coburn gave evidence to the inquiry. He said receiving the concerns from the West Australian regulator was serious, as was the potential harm to the elderly investors. Mr Coburn believes the regulator had sufficient information in March 2017 to launch an investigation to gather evidence to obtain a court injunction. \"It is incredible that ASIC would wait a year to commence an investigation,\" he told the senators. But that was strongly rejected by Joe Longo. \"To cut a long story short, the evidence that was available to us at the relevant time, or could have been reasonably available to us at the relevant time, would not have supported going off to court, certainly not with the alacrity and enthusiasm that the inquiry heard,\" he said.  \"That would not have been successful.\" Instead, the corporate watchdog has defended what it did do. In August 2017, ASIC issued a stop order which prevented further selling on the grounds that investors in the Sterling Income Trust were being given misleading or deceptive information, including that there were significant conflicts of interest and risks that weren't fully disclosed. ASIC argues this was the fastest and most effective way to protect future customers. But after the stop order, the documentation was changed and new customers were signed up. Sterling New Life customers paid another $2.8 million into the Sterling Income Trust after August 2017. ASIC took further action, which included a formal investigation, before the Trust began to be wound up at the end of August the next year. After the collapse, ASIC took legal action against the company responsible for the Sterling Income Trust, Theta Asset Management. That case resulted in the Federal Court finding that product disclosure statements given to the victims were defective and included misleading or deceptive information which contravened the Corporations Act. Theta was fined $2 million, while its managing director Robert Marie was ordered to pay $100,000 and disqualified from managing corporations for four years. When pressed about whether ASIC had taken too long, Mr Longo said the picture was emerging over time. He also admitted: \"I think it's fair to say that we would have liked to have moved a bit more quickly along the way.\" Mr Longo said ASIC had been busy elsewhere, dealing with larger collapses. \"In terms of our process at the time, there were several other collapses that the office was looking at in Western Australia ... they, regrettably, involved much larger sums of money,\" he said.  Sisters Maddy and Victoria Stansfield have been saving for a house since high school — but their builder is in administration and they may lose their life savings.  ASIC also stressed during evidence that it is not a merits regulator and does not assess whether investments are good or bad before registering them, which means they can be risky and speculative and involve people who have previously been involved in other failed ventures. Sterling Group found another way to get around the pressure from ASIC It then signed up 39 new customers, raising another $7.5 million. The regulator now alleges Sterling Group \"actively concealed from ASIC fundraising through Silverlink companies.\" In a submission to the inquiry, ASIC claimed \"Sterling's communications with ASIC omitted the Silverlink tenant-investors from a list of Sterling New Life Lessees,\" and \"ASIC has since obtained an email dated 24 July 2018 which was sent internally to a SNLL sales representative which specifically referred to concealing Silverlink from ASIC\". Cath Dall's mother Susanne, who is on a disability pension, signed up under Silverlink. Cath believes strong early intervention by ASIC might have prevented her mother from doing so. \"They were able to raise another $7.5 million from vulnerable investors,\" she told 7.30.  \"Again, to me, [that] just shows that ASIC was not paying close enough attention.\" Sterling Group founder Ray Jones and his son Ryan Jones — who was a director of various companies within the group — declined to be interviewed, citing legal constraints. Ray Jones has previously told the ABC: \"I am heartbroken for the situation … Sterling New Life customers have found themselves in.\" \"The directors and former directors of the various companies within the group financially heavily supported these companies,\" he said. \"Three of the directors have now had to apply for the full old age pension. \"Furthermore one is bankrupt and another is on unemployment benefits. \"All these parties have extreme empathy for all who have been disadvantaged by this disastrous outcome.\" The inquiry plans to hold another day of hearings on December 15 before its final report is released on February 1 next year. In Western Australia, Alex Tufekcic has found temporary accommodation but doesn't know where he's going to live after that. He is putting his possessions into a storage shed. Mr Tufekcic wants the inquiry to recommend compensation, a call that is likely to meet resistance. He points to the Sterling home he's about to move out of when making his point. \"I organised this place, to live here for the rest of our days,\" he said.  \"Now I have to pull it down.\""}, "/news/2021-12-01/part-of-bussell-highway-duplication-opened-ahead-of-summer/100665512": {"description": "Why the trip south to Busselton might be a little quicker this summer", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The duplication of one of Western Australia's riskiest roads is one step closer to completion with the first stage of the works along Bussell Highway opened to the public this week. The road links Perth and Bunbury to major tourist hotspots Busselton and Margaret River. In 2019 the road was named the state's \"riskiest\" by insurance company RAC due to its narrow lanes and lack of overtaking options.  To improve the popular highway, the federal and state governments allocated $85 million to turn a 17 kilometre section between Busselton and Capel into a dual carriageway. Main Roads, who is completing the work, has now opened two southbound lanes between Capel and Hutton Road.  A spokesman said some remaining cleaning up works would continue over the next fortnight. He said the northbound lanes of that section will open mid-December, weather permitting. Works to widen the first 5 kilometres was set to be finished in the middle of the year, but the spokesman said weather had caused serious delays. \"The worksite experienced nearly three times the monthly rainfall average in October,\" he said. City of Busselton Mayor Grant Henley said the roadworks had caused headaches for drivers. \"For those that have done that daily commute over that time it's been painstaking,\" he said.  \"We all know that it will be fantastic in the end and a huge leap forward in safety for those that travel on that stretch of road, but it's been a long time coming.\"  Mayor Henley said while the newly opened lanes come head of the busy summer period, tourists should still expect some delays.  \"It will push those merging zones a little further down,\" he said.  \"[But] the road works will continue, so it won't be an overnight smooth ride but certainly it will be great to see it progressing.\" Before the works, the highway could often come to a standstill on Christmas and long weekends as motorists attempted to merge into one lane.  Mayor Henley said he hoped the new lanes would make a difference this summer.  \"It will shorten the bottleneck,\" he said.  \"[It will] cut down some of the headaches for people getting down and then getting home from the region.\"  The second and final stage of the works have already begun and will continue into next year."}, "/news/2021-12-01/agl-offers-redundancies/100664306": {"description": "Energy giant AGL slashes its coal and gas workforce", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australia's largest electricity company is slashing its coal and gas power-plant workforce, amid a surge of cheap renewable energy. AGL has confirmed it is offering voluntary redundancies at its Victorian, South Australian and New South Wales' plants. Workers are being offered packages to leave Victorian brown coal Loy Yang A power station, which is scheduled to close in 2047. Staff at its two New South Wales' Hunter Valley coal power stations: Bayswater, scheduled to close in 2035; and its Liddell plant, set to close in April 2023, are also being targeted. Workers at AGL's South Australian Torrens gas plant have also been offered redundancies. The move followed AGL's announcement that it would close of one of its Torrens B gas generation units late next year.  An AGL spokeswoman said the company was trying to make a 10-per-cent cut to operational costs, and denied union reports that it was trying to slash 10 per cent of its staff. The company would not reveal how many staff it intended to shed. \"[We are] addressing the need to respond to market and operating conditions in order to maintain a sustainable business,\" an AGL spokeswoman said. Bruce Mountain, director of the Victoria Energy Policy Centre, said the move could be linked AGL's planned demerger announced in July where all four power plants would be owned and operated by a newly formed company. Mr Mountain said AGL is Australia's biggest coal-fired generator and \"doesn't have a shiny future\".  has lowered wholesale and retail prices \"They're trying to split their business up between their customers and their coal generators, that's their underlying strategic driver at the moment,\" Mr Mountain said. \"I think a major demerger like this gives them an opportunity to make decisions on staffing levels. \"They'll be looking to be making their businesses more profitable and looking to reduce headcount.\" AGL denied the demerger was behind the redundancies, and said the move was in response to operating conditions. Unions say they accept that renewables are changing the viability of coal and gas plants, but remain concerned about safety of the AGL Loy Yang A plant. \"I struggle to understand how you can run a power station with less of your workforce and operate under the same conditions and same output as you can today,\" Gippsland Trades and Labour Council secretary Steve Dodd said. The unions want AGL to be more up-front with workers about when to expect power plants to close. it will close neighbouring Yallourn power station in 2028, four years early And while Alinta's Loy Yang B generator in the Latrobe Valley has an official shutdown date of 2047,  its chief executive Jeff Dimery recently conceded it could close in as few as 15 years. \"I would call on the generators to actually consult not only with the unions and the workers, but also with the community at large,\" Mr Dodd said. \"Every time a worker is made redundant in the power industry that has financial impact on the community.\" A spokesperson from Environment Victoria said Loy Alinta's planned closure date for Loy Yang A in 2047 was \"a fantasy\" and AGL needed to release a clear timeline for closing the plant. \"Again, we see decisions made in boardrooms impacting ordinary people,\" Environment Victoria's Jono La Nauze said. He called for \"a clear strategy, clear timelines, and certainty around closure dates that allows people to plan their lives.\""}, "/news/2021-12-01/china-australia-trade-wars-us-kurt-campbell-lowy-institute/100664732": {"description": "China's trade war was intended to bring Australia 'to its knees'. A top US adviser says Canberra may have won", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " US President Joe Biden's top Asia adviser says that China's campaign of economic punishment against Australia has failed and has predicted that Beijing will re-engage with the federal government on Australia's terms. coordinated sanctions on a range of Australian products \"I fully believe that over time, that China will re-engage with Australia. But it will, I believe, re-engage on Australian terms,\" he said. \"I think China's preference would have been to break Australia. To drive Australia to its knees … I don't believe that's going to be the way it's going to play out. \"I believe that China will engage because it is in its own interest to have a good relationship with Australia.\" Much to the chagrin of the Beijing bureaucracy, Australian trade is booming, driving a rapid turnaround from the COVID-inspired crunch that crippled the global economy last year, writes Ian Verrender. have been very damaging for some Australian industries Mr Campbell said that China respected \"strength\" and that Australia's resolve in the face of the economic sanctions would strengthen its hand when dealing with the Chinese government. met with Chinese President Xi Jinping last month \"President Biden was very clear and animated about what we had seen in Australia, [the] border [conflict] with India, all the things that I've mentioned, and just basically said 'we were concerned,'\" he told the Lowy Institute. \"We're concerned by some of these steps and what it signals with respect to China.\" the AUKUS technology pact between the United States, Australia and the United Kingdom Are you wondering why there's so much fuss about Australia's decision to acquire nuclear submarines? We've broken it down for you. While the main initiative being pursued under the pact is Australia's drive to build eight nuclear-powered submarines using US and UK technology, the framework is also being used to foster broader cooperation on a range of other defence technologies. Mr Campbell said there was a sense of \"excitement\" about that broader cooperation program and said \"several\" US allies had asked if they could collaborate under the framework, although he did not name individual countries. \"Many close allies have come to us, in the immediate aftermath and said, 'Can we participate?' 'Can we engage?'\" he said. \"And it is to the credit of Australia and Great Britain, that they insisted, yes, this is not a closed architecture. It's an open architecture. We want to work with partners in these key areas of military innovation as we go forward.\" Some Australian analysts have raised concerns that the drive to develop nuclear submarines with the United Kingdom and the United States will undermine Australian sovereignty because future governments will remain dependent on US technology and expertise in order to operate the new boats. Mr Campbell insisted that Australian sovereignty would not be \"lost\" but said there would be more \"strategic intimacy\" between the United States, Australia and the United Kingdom under AUKUS as the three militaries boosted cooperation. \"I think what I'm suggesting is that Australian sailors will have the opportunity to serve on American vessels and vice versa,\" he said. \"I think you can expect American submarines to port more commonly in Australian ports. I think we're going to operate and share perspectives much more than we've done in the past.\" He also refused to be drawn into the furious domestic political debate over Taiwan. Taiwan's President says she has \"faith\" the United States would defend the island against a Chinese attack. Defence Minister Peter Dutton was slammed by Labor Shadow Foreign Minister Penny Wong accused Mr Dutton of stoking tensions with China for political gain and undermining America's policy of strategic ambiguity – where it declines to say exactly how it would respond to a Chinese invasion of the self-ruled island. Mr Dutton responded by accusing Labor of \"crab walking away from the Australia-US alliance\". But Mr Campbell simply reiterated the existing US policy on Taiwan \"has not changed\" and that the Biden administration was still working to ensure Taiwan had \"the appropriate defensive articles to be able to deter aggression\". \"I do just want to underscore that this is a very delicate matter. We understand the delicate role it plays in US-China relations,\" he told the Lowy Institute. \"But we also believe that if the United States is purposeful, is determined, and is clear in its messaging, that we can maintain peace and stability and to secure the status quo in the future.\""}, "/news/2021-12-01/towong-tourism-campaign/100664490": {"description": "Mountain bike tracks and a wilderness retreat among the ideas floated to lure tourists to Towong ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A canoe trail, a wilderness retreat, and a distillery are just some of the tourism ideas in the Towong Council's latest plan to double visitation to the region by 2025.  The Towong Shire Council's draft Destination Management Plan aims to grow daytrip yield by 47 per cent and overnight yield by 30 per cent as it looks to capitalise on its natural north-east Victorian assets and attract visitors to stay for longer. The region is still recovering from the devastating 2019-2020 bushfires and the pandemic. Towong Mayor Andrew Whitehead said it was an ambitious goal to double tourism in just three years, but it needed to be done. \"It's a big goal, but it's about increasing the number of visitors to the shire and also extending their length of stay and increasing the visitor spend,\" he said. \"We find that people come but they haven't been staying long enough.\" The Towong Shire's visitor economy attracts 195,000 visitors annually who spend $23.9 million. This accounts for 6 per cent of High Country visitation and 4 per cent of visitor spending. The draft plan identifies six investment projects as short-term priorities to develop the shire's visitor economy. This includes the $3 million Bellbridge Boathouse to attract waterfront commercial food premises to the Lake Hume foreshore, a $400,000 activation plan for Mitta Mitta to tap into its mountain bike potential, and a $4 million Gravity and Adventure Park at Mount Elliot, near Corryong. The priority projects also include a $7 million Cudgewa Valley Wilderness Retreat to improve accommodation options, $5 million to upgrade Tallangatta's foreshore with a cafe, playground, and trails and $400,000 for a feasibility study into an Upper Murray Canoe Trail. Other ideas not on the priority list include a distillery at Corryong, revitalising Tallangatta's Butter Factory, upgrading Corryong's golf course, creating a Man from Snowy River Australian Music Festival, and putting more mobile food vans into Bethanga and Mitta Mitta where infrastructure hampers commercial development. \"We've got all the natural offerings up here but things haven't been developed, so that's where we are trying to get some of these projects up and running,\" Mr Whitehead said. \"So when people do come, there's plenty for them to do. \"It's also for the whole family.\" The council will look to private investment and seek government funding to support the delivery of the projects. \"We are really after any feedback from the community,\" the Mayor said. \"Have a look and make sure you give your feedback so we can take that to a council meeting hopefully in February.\" Submissions close at 5pm on December 31, 2021."}, "/news/2021-12-01/dual-naming-nsw-far-south-coast/100664028": {"description": "'It's hard to describe the elation': Four spiritual sites in NSW to adopt Indigenous dual naming", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Four sites on NSW's far south coast will be known by dual names in recognition of the local Yuin nation.  Gulaga will feature alongside Mount Dromedary, Biamanga with Mumbulla Mountain, Barunguba with Montague Island and Najanuka with Little Dromedary Mountain Following public consultation, the state's Geographical Names Board officially assigned the dual names of Gulaga for Mount Dromedary, Biamanga for Mumbulla Mountain, Barunguba for Montague Island and Najanuka for Little Dromedary Mountain using the local Dhurga language. For Bunja Smith, a Walbunja Elder and Chair of the Biamanga and Gulaga National Park Board of Management, it is a welcome decision. \"It's hard to describe the elation you feel when you see your culture put up-front,\" he said. \"It has a reconciliation theme because we've kept both names … but I believe the trend will occur where they start using the Aboriginal name.\" The NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service said both names have equal status and are considered official names. Signs, maps and directories will feature both names and the signage in each park will be updated accordingly.  Mr Smith said the change will come naturally. \"If I walked down the street in Narooma and I asked 10 people who Montague was, they couldn't tell me,\" he said. \"But if I mentioned the word 'Barunguba' to them, I reckon I'd spark some interest. \"It's a new step forward in reconciliation, cultural identity and the whole community coming together.\"  Public feedback on the proposal to dual-name the four sites opened in June and July this year. The names are set to be updated at each site over the next six to 12 months. NPWS Eurobodalla Area Manager Paula Tomkins said the public can also expect to see the new names updated on maps. \"For the first time, dual-name sites in the state will be recorded on the NSW topographic maps using the Aboriginal names first,\" she said. \"The physical signage will have the Aboriginal name and underneath it will be the European name.\" Ms Tomkins mirrored Mr Smiths belief that the dual names will be embraced by residents in the Eurobodalla and Bega Valley. \"The community are being really positive about it,\" she said. \"Over time, these names have been used more often anyway so it's almost a natural progression.\""}, "/news/2021-12-01/robe-faces-covid-scare/100663960": {"description": "Popular coastal destination hit by COVID scare just one week after SA border reopens", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A popular seaside holiday town on the Limestone Coast has been rocked by a COVID-19 scare just a week after the reopening of the South Australian border. A testing site will be established in the township after a pub, cafes, and a petrol station were identified as exposure sites. The Limestone Coast, which straddles the Victorian border,  has been hit with multiple COVID-19 exposure sites since November 23 when the state's border reopened. The Caledonian Inn in Robe has been listed as a close contact exposure location. Co-owner Geoff Prest said he had been in discussions with SA Health officials who told him the site needed to be cleaned but could remain open. \"[SA Health] rang and filled me in on everything that needed to be done — so we're pretty on top of it,\" Mr Prest said. \"It's very frustrating and very challenging for people in Robe with businesses, because we're going to be exposed with the borders open.\" Mr Prest said five of his staff members were in isolation. \"We're just a lucky because we've got some kids that have finished uni that are back,\" Mr Prest said. \"They are back in town and can come in to cover the ones that can't work today. \"We struggle to have enough staff at the best of times, let alone to bring in a 'Team B' on a moment's notice because four of our staff members have been exposed.\" Mr Prest said he was \"thrilled\" about the state's border opening last week, but it came with its drawbacks. \"We thought we might be lucky to get through a week. And we did, we got through one week,\" he said. \"It's just the world we live in. It's reality. It is what it is, and we will deal with it.\" Want more local news? Sign up to ABC South East SA's weekly email newsletter Member for MacKillop Nick McBride, whose electorate incorporates Robe, said he had received a text from SA Pathology confirming a swabbing station in the town. \"I can't tell you when and where, but I'll get further clarity on that,\" he said. \"So (people) don't have to travel outside of Robe to get these tests done.\" Currently, the closest testing site to Robe is a 50-minute drive to Millicent. Mr McBride said it was important to have a testing site as close as possible to the exposure locations. \"The easier we make this for everyone, the more people will participate,\" he said. \"We certainly don't want lots of people going down to Millicent … taking the issue away from Robe to Millicent.\" He said the Limestone Coast community knew exposure sites \"were going to happen\". \"They've been at Naracoorte, they've been at Kingston, now they're at Robe,\" Mr McBride said. \"They are going to appear more and more, and I think people have just got to be ready for this.\" But Mr McBride said the current quarantine process for people \"caught out\" by exposure locations was \"quite cumbersome\". \"This can be quite difficult and unfortunate,\" he said. \"I'm hoping that that sort of this sort of process is no longer required in the future because this is going to put people off.\" 'It's frustrating – no question.\" ABC South East SA contacted SA Health for comment."}, "/news/2021-12-01/popular-central-australia-outback-swimming-hole-shut-for-summer/100662106": {"description": "Popular outback swimming hole shut for summer", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Ellery Creek Big Hole, 90 kilometres west of Alice Springs, will be closed for most of the summer months. Northern Territory Parks and Wildlife district manager Phil Cowan said the closure would allow the popular swimming hole's 2 kilometre dirt access road to be sealed \"We've got a exciting project to seal that 2 kilometre of access road in of Namatjira Drive as you drive to the campgrounds' and work is already started. Mr Cowan said the decision to re-seal the road in the hotter months of the year was made as there are fewer visitors to the region. \"[It's] going to be closed until late January. \"But we'll reopen the place for a couple of weeks over Christmas and New Years. \"So people will still be about to get in there and have a swim and enjoy the waterhole for a couple of weeks over the Christmas break. \"But it's all sort of systems go to get that road sealed as of as of now,\" he said. Mr Cowan said that the department is aware of the waterhole's popularity and there was some consideration in making it accessible throughout the road work period. \"The difficulty with the Ellery road is [that] it's quite narrow as it gets closer to the campground infrastructure. \"There's a number of red gums on the eastern side of the road going in there and that they are sacred trees that can't be touched. \"There's just no ability to sort of have one line open while the other is closed because the road isn't actually that wide."}, "/news/2021-12-01/sa-public-liability-insurance/100664198": {"description": "'The doors are closed again': Skyrocketing insurance cost forcing SA clubs to close", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " After a tumultuous couple of years due to COVID-19, South Australian pubs and clubs are now facing another barrier to keeping their doors open: insurance. Local venues have been forced to close as the cost of public liability insurance has skyrocketed and insurers have refused to provide cover. Long-running CBD nightclub Sugar has been closed for eight months due to a combination of COVID-19 restrictions and difficulties obtaining public liability insurance. Owner Driller Jet Armstrong said he was only able to afford the rising costs of insurance due to crowdfunding. \"I turned from one broker to another here in South Australia when I couldn't get insurance and they ended up saying to me we will never, ever get insurance,\" he said. \"In desperation, I rang a friend who put me onto a broker in Sydney, who four weeks after I contacted him, managed to get a policy for us, an affordable policy. \"Our policy cost us $32,000 a year for 20 years of the venue's operation, and now our cost is $88,000. \"Which of course after being closed for eight months, we've basically exhausted all of our bank account, which was $200,000. \"And we had to start a GoFundMe campaign and it's only the money from the GoFundMe campaign that has managed to keep us afloat long enough to open our doors. \"In fact, the irony is incredible that we're having this conversation because we're opening the doors tonight for the first night.\" Mr Armstrong said the first quote he was given by a local broker was $305,000 — 10 times what the club had been paying. \"Which is basically a quarter of our growth turnover, and obviously that's a 'go away' quote,\" he said. Live music venue The Grace Emily, also in Adelaide's CBD, closed its doors at 4pm yesterday after failing to find insurance. Owner Symon Jarowyj said he hoped the closure would be for two weeks. \"Basically my broker for insurance got given two weeks' notice from my insurer that they wouldn't be renewing our public liability policy, which is legal, but two weeks to find a public liability policy in apparently a high-risk market … just didn't give my broker enough time to get something over the line,\" he said. Mr Jarowyj said the cost of public liability insurance was \"getting higher and higher each year\". \"The problem is the insurer that I did have didn't even offer an extension until we found a new policy,\" he said. Mr Jarowyj said the situation, which followed a long period of COVID-19 restrictions, was \"not great\". \"The doors are closed again and [there is] no income coming in but hopefully it's for a short time, not a long time,\" he said. \"And December is predominantly a busier period. We had some good sold-out shows that were coming up in the next couple of weeks so they've had to be moved to other venues.\" Mr Armstrong said he had raised the issue with the industry and state politicians. \"We've been the first to experience it but I knew this was going to affect the industry as a whole,\" he said."}, "/news/2021-12-01/gdp-economic-growth-september-quarter-2021/100664566": {"description": "Australia's Delta drop in GDP smaller than feared and the rebound looks strong", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australia's economy has recorded its third-biggest fall on record, as COVID lockdowns shut economic activity across the mainland's south-east. But business owners, workers and analysts are all observing a strong bounce back, leaving little doubt that Australia's economy will recover most or all of the lost ground over the current December quarter. Alex Cadger runs The Blonde Group, a catering and events business, in Sydney. During the latest lockdown, his business started delivering baked goods and boxed food, as well as delivering gifts for corporate clients. \"The goal was not to be profitable and make a lot of money — the goal was really to keep the staff employed … so that when we were able to reopen, everyone was engaged and employed,\" he told The Business. It is a strategy that appears to be paying dividends. With Sydney reopening, Mr Cadger said the demand for events is back with a vengeance and his clients are willing to splash out. \"People are definitely ready to party, they're booking really glamorous events.\" Mr Cadger's experience has been reflected in the Bureau of Statistics's National Accounts released today, and more timely economic indicators since. Gross domestic product (GDP) slumped 1.9 per cent in the September quarter, amid lockdowns across mainland Australia's south-east. But the result was much better than most economists had feared, with forecasts centring on a 2.7 per cent quarterly decline as large parts of the economy were shut in New South Wales, Victoria and the ACT for most or all of the September quarter. All sorts of things determine election outcomes but the economy is one and right now it could scarcely look better for the government.\n\n\n  Those lockdowns showed up in a 4.8 per cent fall for household consumption spending, led by a 5.8 per cent slump in services spending focused on hospitality (down a whopping 21.2 per cent), recreation and culture, and transport.  AMP Capital senior economist Diana Mousina said it appears that Australians are indeed learning to live with COVID, lockdowns included. \"I think households and businesses are learning how to deal with lockdowns better than what we saw last year,\" she told ABC News. The acting head of national accounts at the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), Sean Crick, said non-lockdown states also helped partially offset the decline in Australia's south-east. \"Household spending in NSW, Victoria and the ACT fell 8.4 per cent compared with the other states, which rose 0.7 per cent,\" he said. \"The fall in domestic demand was only partly offset by growth in net trade and public sector expenditure.\" Looking beyond the latest quarterly GDP figures, the truth is Australians are getting better off more slowly than before. However, the public sector also softened the blow for the economy through support payments that saw household gross disposable income rise 4.6 per cent — the most since the Rudd government's global financial crisis stimulus payments in the December quarter of 2008. Small and medium enterprises contributed to the jump in income with a surprise 8 per cent bounce in profits, also no doubt helped greatly by stimulus payments.  That rise in incomes combined with the slump in spending saw the household savings ratio jump from 11.8 to 19.8 per cent, which was approaching the record high of 23.6 per cent hit during the first, nationwide COVID lockdown in the June quarter of 2020. Despite last quarter's dive, Australia's economy was still 3.9 per cent bigger than it was at the same point in 2020, after the initial COVID-19 lockdowns resulted in the worst quarterly fall on record of 6.8 per cent in the June quarter of 2020. Although the September quarter drop again left Australia's economy smaller than it was prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. \"GDP in the September quarter 2021 was 0.2 per cent below the December quarter 2019 pre-pandemic level,\" Mr Crick said. However, economists expect that to change in the current quarter, with official and private-sector retail sales figures indicating that Australians released from lockdown are using part of their increased savings to spend. Freelance actor Adriane White, who works several jobs and was stood down during Sydney's long lockdown, is a case in point. Towards the end of lockdown, she found she was being offered more shifts and will soon be back close to her regular work schedule. Australia's jobs market keeps taking blow after blow from COVID-19 lockdowns but somehow bounces back. \"I would say there's actually more work, there seems to be a big boom, lots of shifts going,\" she observed. And she is planning to spend more herself on seeing live theatre and arts events after months of missing out. \"We need a community, we need that feeling of connection … if it does mean there is a bit of a spending boost in that arena, then I'll be doing my part,\" she added. In the outer northern suburbs of Melbourne, Heath Lawley is also seeing pent-up demand for group fitness at his newly-opened gym. \"Having the social aspect back into our community is super important,\" he said, having delayed opening the business for around a year-and-a-half due to multiple COVID lockdowns in Victoria. On the business front, ABS figures indicate that, while investment fell during lockdown, expected investment for this financial year jumped. Mr Cadger is doing his bit. After signing a lease for a new headquarters for this year, he is next looking to purchase a standalone events space. \"I don't like to be too conservative in business,\" he said. \"I'm a risk-taker, so we've got huge plans for next year and we will push forward. Ms Mousina said that meant there would not be another technical recession (two consecutive quarters of economic contraction) in Australia this year after last year's COVID recession. However, she warned that the emergence of new COVID variants would continue to pose a risk to the economic outlook next year. \"While the government says that they don't want to put us into a lockdown, we still have to say that is a major risk,\" she explained. \"We have seen some parts of Europe having to have additional restrictions go up before the Omicron variant was even announced to the world. \"We might still have ongoing restrictions over the next 6-12 months.\" But, after his experience over the past couple of years, Mr Cadger is not too concerned. \"I'll go day by day with [the new variant]. If that becomes an issue, we will do exactly what we did last time and get through it.\""}, "/news/2021-12-01/house-prices-corelogic-november-2021/100663944": {"description": "Housing price rises are slowing down, so are we near the 'top of the market'?", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australian housing prices have risen for the 14th-straight month, but the pace of growth in November was the slowest since January, indicating the latest boom may be nearing its peak. The latest CoreLogic home value index showed Sydney and Melbourne were driving the slowdown in growth, although Perth had an even smaller increase and prices in Darwin actually fell last month. CoreLogic noted that after a period in which there had been a shortage of properties listed for sale in Australia's two biggest cities, Sydney listings were now back just below the five-year average, while Melbourne's were 8 per cent above. \"There's slowing momentum across Sydney and Melbourne in particular, which is reflective of the fact that stock levels across those cities have pretty well normalised,\" CoreLogic's head of residential research Australia, Eliza Owen, said. \"But if you look at smaller capital cities and regional Australia, where stock levels are still around 30 per cent below their five-year average, there is still that urgency in the market, and it's leading to a further increase in momentum.\" Ms Owen said it was possible that some of the increase in the big-city listings related to Sydneysiders and Melburnians selling up to move elsewhere, but there also seemed to be an increase in property investors selling. \"We have seen a lot of the increase in for-sale listings coming from some of the more concentrated investor markets in the inner cities as well,\" she said. \"That could be reflective of investors looking to cash out at what they perceive to be the top of the market, which could also be a reaction to the kind of announcement effect of APRA (regulator the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority), you know, signalling tighter lending conditions.\" While the two big cities have reported a slowdown, growth rates in Brisbane and Adelaide still have not peaked, sitting at 2.9 and 2.5 per cent respectively last month. However, Ms Owen noted big bank and other analyst forecasts of national housing price declines in 2023. \"It makes sense that we would see downward pressure on prices in response to increased interest rates, especially given that interest rates seems to have been one of the major drivers of the current upswing,\" she told ABC News. House price falls are all but baked in as interest rates start rising over the next couple of years, writes Michael Janda. \"I think the extent of the downturn and the timing of the downturn really does come back to when the RBA would make moves on the cash rate. \"But already we're seeing average fixed rates are rising for new borrowers, and that's probably going to put some downward pressure on demand in the coming months as well.\" Affordability, or the lack of it, also seems likely to halt the latest housing boom. Ms Owen noted that, despite a slowdown in growth to 1.1 per cent last month, Canberra was on the cusp of joining Sydney as the second capital city with a median house price above $1 million. The Canberra median house value was $999,755 in November, according to CoreLogic's data. Melbourne's median house price was not far behind at $986,992. Regional markets also continued to see large price increases at an average of 2.2 per cent across the country last month and 25.2 per cent over the past year. That has left the typical house in regional Australia worth $545,063, with the most expensive property in regional NSW at $695,251."}, "/news/2021-12-01/perth-suburbs-chosen-for-virtual-power-plant/100645048": {"description": "Households in corner of Perth join quest to solve one of the biggest challenges of solar energy", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " As summer kicks off, suburbs on Perth's fringe sharing one of Australia's highest rates of rooftop solar have been chosen for a new $35 million virtual power plant. About 500 households and businesses in Harrisdale and Piara Waters, in Perth's south-east, will be offered subsidised storage batteries or a credit on their power bills as an incentive to take part in the trial, which is being jointly funded by the West Australian and federal governments. It will be the country's latest virtual power plant (VPP) — a network of solar-powered homes that collectively generate and store energy, minimising the use of fossil fuels. Harrisdale and Piara Waters have been selected because more than half of the homes there already have solar panels, compared to the national average of one in four. Kelly and Adrian Lacquiere were relatively early adopters, installing their solar system 11 years ago and upgrading it recently to handle the demands of a family of five. In the early days, the Lacquieres got 47 cents back for every kilowatt hour of excess power they exported to the electricity grid, but the feed-in tariff has since plummeted to 7.1 cents. Mrs Lacquiere said they would be interested in taking part in the trial if it made having a battery to store their power more affordable. \"We don't use all the power that we generate ourselves, so if we can hold onto that and use it ourselves, it's a win-win situation really,\"  Mrs Lacquiere said. logistical challenges caused by Australia's record-breaking uptake of solar PV. Project director Andrew Blaver said the VPP would test how the enormous amount of excess power currently flooding WA's main electricity grid could be better managed. \"If we get way too much solar energy, and we can't learn to manage it better or manage the power flows, we could have some serious power quality or reliability issues in the network,\"  Mr Blaver said. \"If we can harness that, or store it in customer assets (batteries) or community batteries, we can then wait for the value of energy to be higher, we can package that excess customer energy. \"And what's really unique about Project Symphony is that we can bid that into a new market that gets extra value for those electrons for customers.\" Under the project, about 150 households will be offered subsidised batteries which usually retail for around $10,000. A large community battery will also be installed. But Project Symphony does not require all 500 participants to have rooftop solar. Mr Blaver said households with smart appliances, including air conditioners and pool pumps, may also be eligible to be part of the virtual network. Residents who agreed to opt-in would have their appliances managed remotely. \"If you've got an energy asset that's using a lot of energy, we can communicate with that smart appliance for certain parts of the day and we can reduce the pressure by just asking that air conditioner to go to 75 or 50 per cent of its energy use. \"We'll only do it for 10 or 15 minutes in a way that customers don't even notice, but they get rewarded for participating. \"Collectively, when you've got hundreds of air conditioners in a local area participating, that reduces the peak and takes pressure off the system.\" Although Australia's carbon emissions have been trending downwards, WA's emissions have continued to rise, according to the latest figures available. The National Greenhouse Accounts released in May 2020 found WA's emissions have risen by 21 per cent since 2005, mainly due to growth in mining and exports. WA Energy Minister Bill Johnston said WA had a higher percentage of renewable energy in the grid than the national electricity market, and Project Symphony would further boost that take-up. \"Virtual power plants are the future and we are trying them in a number of different scenarios,\" he said. \"Instead of having very large power stations a long distance from energy users and then large wires bringing electricity to the suburbs and towns, the suburbs and towns will be the generators.\" The Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) is chipping in $8.6 million to the project. Federal Energy Minister Angus Taylor said Australia needed to address the issue of excessive solar power flooding its electricity grids, and Project Symphony would add to the existing knowledge on how this could be done. \"We have to crack this problem,\" Mr Taylor said. \"Ultimately, we do want to have a much higher level of renewables in our grid but it's got to to be stable, it's got to be affordable and it's got to be reliable. \"We're seeing new technologies coming in like electric vehicles starting to ramp up now and that will put even more pressure on the traditional system, problems that can be solved with pilots like this.\" where solar systems and batteries have been supplied and installed free of charge to 1,100 homes Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis (IEEFA) energy analyst Dr Gabrielle Kuiper said Project Symphony was a significant and worthwhile experiment, but Australia also needed to scale up as fast as possible to make the transition to a 100 per cent renewable electricity supply. She said part of the answer was incentivising electric cars which were like \"batteries on wheels\". \"Currently we've got a federal government that has said it is going to put in electric vehicle charging stations, but not support electric vehicles,\" she said. \"A household battery is six to ten times smaller than an electric vehicle battery so electric vehicles … can provide a huge amount of value to our electricity system. \"Just like we subsidised rooftop solar in the beginning, we really need federal government support for electric vehicles.\" Dr Kuiper said the other thing that was needed was demand-responsive household appliance standards, similar to the system being trialled in Project Symphony. \"So in somewhere like California, there is the ability to turn up or turn down peoples' air conditioning or hot water systems, obviously with consumer over-ride where they need it,\" she said. \"That ability to turn up or turn down means that those appliances can really help the grid on days where it is, say, very hot or there is bushfire risk.\" Australia's roadmap for boosting renewable energy and reducing emissions \"This is something we have to do,\" she said. \"If you look at Australia's emissions, more than 50 per cent come from the energy sector and this is low-hanging fruit for us because we do have the resources.\" Associate professor Urmee said batteries would play a major role in virtual power plants becoming mainstream and their high cost was an issue. She said given Australia's significant lithium resources, the federal government should be offering incentives to companies to manufacture batteries domestically, instead of importing them. \"If we can do it all here, obviously the cost will be much much less,\" she said. Project Symphony is a joint venture between Western Power, WA energy retailer Synergy and the Australian Energy Market Operator. It will run until June 2023."}, "/news/2021-12-01/asx-wallstreet-markets-currencies-commodities/100663734": {"description": "Stocks fall amid COVID-19 Omicron variant concerns ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The Australian share market finished off its lows as the economy contracted by less than expected over the September quarter and despite worries about the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus.  The ASX 200 index dropped 0.3pc to 7,236, while the Australian dollar rose 0.6pc to 71.65 US cents at 4:30pm AEDT. The All Ordinaries index fell by nearly 1 per cent around midday just after the GDP data came out, as investors fretted about the increase in Omicron cases in Australia, and news that the US Federal Reserve was considering pulling back stimulus sooner than expected.  But it pared those losses by the close and ended down 0.4 per cent to 7,558.  The ASX 200 index dropped 0.3 per cent to 7,236 with nearly all sectors in the red, aside from miners.  Among the losers were education stocks, consumer firms, utilities and real estate.  The top movers on the benchmark index were miner South32 (+4pc), real estate investment trust Waypoint (+3.1pc) and rare earths miner Lynas (+2.7pc), which hit a record high.  Iron ore miners rose on a rally in iron ore prices in futures trade.  The worst performers were plumbing and car accessories firm GUD Holdings (-7.6pc) after a discounted share placement, radiology software firm Pro Medicus (-7.4pc) and IDP Education (-6pc). The Commonwealth Bank has finalised the sale of more than half of investment arm Colonial First State to US private equity giant KKR. It rose 0.8 per cent.  ANZ acknowledged it was facing a class action in the Federal Court over alleged unfair contracts for credit card holders.  ANZ shares pared their losses and fell 0.2 per cent to $26.64. Disgraced casino operator Crown Resorts announced that former Telstra boss Ziggy Switkowski was elected as chairman by the board. Crown shares fell 0.7 per cent to $10.94.  the Australian economy contracted by 1.9 per cent over the September quarter Spot gold tumbled by 5 per cent overnight to $US1,775.51 an ounce, but rose to $US1,779.68 in Asian trade.  Brent crude oil slumped 4.1 per cent overnight to $US70.22 a barrel after vaccine maker Moderna cast doubt on whether coronavirus vaccines would work against the Omicron variant.  It regained some lost ground in Asian trade to $US71.11 a barrel, up 2.7 per cent.  Commonwealth Bank commodities analyst Vivek Dhar said China bought 2.8 million tonnes of Australian coal last month, the first official coal imports from Australia since November 2020.  China imposed an unofficial ban on coal from Australia in October 2020 because of a diplomatic row.  But Mr Dhar said last month's purchases appeared to be a pragmatic move, with the nation's power industry suffering a shortage and the Australian coal being bought from stockpiles at Chinese ports.  Thermal coal at the Port of Newcastle fell 4.6 per cent to $152 a tonne. US Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell said the risk of higher inflation had increased and the US central bank is considering winding down bond purchases earlier than forecast.  In his testimony before the Senate Banking Committee, Mr Powell said the US central bank could revisit its plan to scale back bond purchases at its meeting in two weeks because of a strong economy and surging inflation.  Mr Powell told the committee the US economy continued to strengthen, job growth remained robust and high inflation was expected to last longer than the US central bank expected.  \"At this point, the economy is very strong and inflationary pressures are high and it is therefore appropriate, in my view, to consider wrapping up the taper of our asset purchases, which we actually announced at our November meeting, a few months sooner,\" he said.  Art Hogan, chief market strategist at National Securities in New York, said the Federal Reserve was being hawkish despite the emergence of the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus.  \"Right now, there were some expectations that we'd hear a more dovish Federal Reserve, but we're not,\" he said. \"We're hearing a more hawkish Fed, but not that hawkish to the extent that people are betting that they'll raise rates sooner next year.\" Mr Powell's comments weighed on markets that were already concerned about the Omicron variant. That's after Moderna's chief executive issued a warning about the effectiveness of COVID-19 shots against the strain. The vaccine maker's shares dropped 4.4 per cent, while Regeneron Pharmaceuticals fell after it said its COVID-19 antibody treatment and other similar drugs could be less effective against Omicron. The Dow Jones index ended down 1.9 per cent to 34,484, the S&P 500 fell 1.9 per cent to 4,567, and the Nasdaq Composite dropped 1.6 per cent to 15,538. The declines were broad based, with all the 11 major S&P sectors down, led lower by utilities, consumer firms, banks and energy stocks.  The uncertainty has triggered fresh alarm at a time when supply chain logjams are weighing on economic recovery and central banks globally are contemplating a return to pre-pandemic monetary policy to tackle a surge in inflation. US consumer confidence slipped in November amid concerns about the rising cost of living and the COVID-19 pandemic.  In Europe, inflation in the eurozone hit a record 4.9 per cent over the year to November.  The FTSE 100 in London fell 0.7 per cent to 7,059, the DAX in Germany dropped 1.2 per cent to 15,100 and the CAC 40 in Paris lost 0.8 per cent to 6,721.   "}, "/news/2021-12-01/tas-salmon-industry-fights-back-against-negative-press/100661988": {"description": "Salmon producers develop alliance to help tackle 'negative' press", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " In its first unified move to counter anti-fish farm campaigns, business leaders connected to the Tasmanian salmon industry have formed an alliance to talk up its importance as an employer and a contributor to the state's economy.  The Spectran Group's Mark Hindmarsh does environmental monitoring for the fish farm industry and has signed up to the Tasmanian Farmed Salmon Alliance.   \"Unfortunately a lot of the negative comments around are broadly misinformed,\" he said.  \"I think if people took the opportunity to understand what these businesses do and how we work together to achieve the greater good there'd be a more positive outcome from it.\"  The alliance has been organised by Tasmania's three major salmon producers — Tassal, Huon and Petuna — and a few key stakeholders.  Over the last three decades the value of Tasmania's salmon industry has grown to around $1 billion and there are plans to double that by 2030.  But the burgeoning local sector has not been without controversy. In 2017, it was revealed high stocking limits at Macquarie Harbour on Tasmania's west coast had created a 'dead zone' around a Tassal lease. Tasmania's largest fish farmer was forced to destock the Franklin lease and the EPA slashed the harbour's overall stocking limit.  Later that year locals launched an ultimately unsuccessful campaign to oppose new fish farming leases at Okehampton Bay on Tasmania's east coast. Earlier this year, Booker Prize-winning author Richard Flanagan — who owned a shack on Bruny Island close to several fish farming leases — released the book Toxic, which accused the industry of polluting pristine Tasmanian waterways and the state government of regulatory failure. In a statement to the stock exchange in August, Tassal conceded the book had been \"unsettling to the industry\", and in state parliament primary industries minister Guy Barnett referred to \"dark forces\" trying to bring the sector down.  John De Bruyn, general manager of logistics company De Bruyn's Transport, said a big part of the alliance's job would be highlighting the importance of the industry as a regional employer in Tasmania.  \"We think [the alliance] is a fantastic initiative to try and get those positive messages out and dispel some of the misinformation,\" he said.  \"I've been involved in this industry for 10 years now and I've been to Norway and Canada and have done extensive research into how their industries are run. \"I can tell you we can be proud of what we're doing here in Tasmania. It's world class.\" Mr De Bruyn said on any given day about 20 per cent of his 250-strong labour force worked directly in the fish farming sector — delivering fish feed to fish at sea, maintaining equipment, transporting fish around or working in the warehouse.  Alliance member David Whyte, who runs the BioMar fish feed production plant at Wesley Vale, said fish farming now employed around 12,000 Tasmanians. \"We develop people, we skill them up and it's a fantastic and rewarding job,\" he said.  \"We want the alliance to help people understand the industry offers them a fantastic future and not just them but their children, too.\"  On the same day at Hobart's Town Hall, an anti-fish farm group called Neighbours of Fish Farming launched a campaign to get Australia's major supermarkets to pull farmed Tasmanian salmon off their shelves.  The group told the gathering a petition calling for an immediate moratorium on increased production had already gathered 35,000 signatures.  Bruny Island resident and actor Essie Davis said consumers needed to push supermarkets to change their minds about salmon.  \"We need to stand up and make all our voices heard around this island,\" she said.  \"This is what you can do. Don't buy salmon. Tell your friends not to buy salmon. Tell restaurants and pubs and sushi bars they shouldn't have it on their menu. Because buying salmon is killing Tasmania.\" Set the ABC News website or the app to  Here's a taste of the latest stories from Tasmania:"}, "/news/2021-12-01/insurance-companies-to-stop-billing-tenants-for-property-damage/100661188": {"description": "This couple were slugged $78k over a fire in their rental. Their story led to a 'huge win for renters' across Australia", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Insurance companies have committed to changing their policies around landlord insurance, after consumer groups and the ABC helped to expose the issue earlier this year. ABC revealed a couple from Horsham in regional Victoria were sent a bill for $78,000 after an accidental fire Shortly afterwards, the landlord's insurer, GIO — which is owned by Suncorp — dropped its claim for payment. However, the story and campaigning by consumer advocates has prompted wider changes. All major insurers have now committed to not bill tenants for accidental damage to property, consumer group Choice says. Choice campaigns director Erin Turner described the old policy as \"deeply unfair\" and was pleased major insurers had agreed to meet minimum practices. \"This is one of the most harmful practices I have seen from the insurance sector, and it's great that we have these commitments,\" Ms Turner said. Ms Turner said it was also important to recognise that some insurers already \"had great practices and weren't causing harm\". But Choice said more changes were needed to give renters ultimate protection. \"New players come into the market all the time and insurers can change the practices as well,\" Ms Turner said. \"We need a commitment in a code that covers all insurers. We need regulatory or legislation change. \"Until you have that we can't guarantee that this will apply at all times when renters need it.\" Lauren Arnett and her partner Luke Sierakowski had a fire in the kitchen of the home they rented in the western Victorian town of Horsham last year. Months later, the landlord's insurer GIO sent the couple a $78,000 bill for the damage. The couple said they explained to an insurance assessor at the time that it was an accident, and there had been no follow-up investigation after the event. \"Having that bill hanging over your head, there's dread, this immediate sense of, 'Are we going to be OK, we could be in financial danger right now,'\" Ms Arnett said. Soon after the couple shared their story with the ABC, GIO cancelled its request for payment. Ms Arnett said it was a huge relief to learn insurance companies would be changing their policies. \"It's such a massive weight off the shoulders,\" she said. \"Hearing that there is going to be some change and the fact that we've kind of helped to push that along is … a pretty awesome thing.\" But Ms Arnett said she wanted to see the policy changes outlined in a product disclosure statement (PDS). \"I want the insurance companies to have a sense of accountability that this has happened … and a consumer can point to a line in the PDS,\" she said. Mr Sierakowski said it was an excellent step forward. \"It hopefully will stop anyone from being in the same situation as we were, in the future,\" he said.   Mr Sierakowski said their case highlighted the power imbalance between renters who found themselves lumped with a bill for accidental damage, and the landlord's insurance company. \"The law is insanely grey in this area and undefined … your rights aren't clear,\" he said. \"At least with this commitment from the insurance agency, there will be something for people who find themselves in this circumstance in future.\" The Insurance Council of Australia acknowledged the development. \"Residential landlord insurers have been responsive to feedback regarding this issue, and many insurers have responded by adjusting their practices and procedures,\" a spokeswoman said. Choice and suburban legal service WEstjustice had been alarmed at the number of cases similar to the Horsham couple. WEstjustice legal director Matthew Martin said he had seen cases of landlord insurers demanding as much as $300,000 from tenants for accidental damage caused to a property. \"We saw some pretty alarming recovery action against renters for damage that they either caused accidentally or that there wasn't actually proof that they caused the damage, or even in circumstances where it was confirmed that they didn't cause the damage,\" he said. He described the policy change as \"a huge win for renters across Australia\". \"It means that renters can no longer be pursued directly for accidental unintentional damage and only for intentional damage,\" Mr Martin said. \"Landlord insurers will now need to deal directly with a renter's contents insurer if they have contents insurance and never directly with a renter for causing accidental unintentional damage.\" Do you know more about this story? Email  He said the policy change would help his current clients. \"If any renter is currently facing a bill for accidental unintentional damage and they don't have insurance cover for it … they should be mentioning to their insurer now that they can't be pursued for that debt.\" But Mr Martin said this was only the first step towards better practices across the insurance industry, and that in the long run, legislative change was needed."}, "/news/2021-11-30/wa-mining-industry-does-not-expect-mass-job-losses/100662240": {"description": "WA mining industry not fearing mass job losses over mandate", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Job losses in Western Australia's booming mining industry are expected to be minimal because of government-imposed vaccine mandates, according to industry groups and the state's Mines Minister. WA's army of fly-in, fly-out workers must have had at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine by midnight tonight. Gold miner Gascoyne Resources, which operates the Dalgaranga gold mine near Mt Magnet, expects to lose just three staff over the vaccine mandates. Gascoyne's managing director Simon Lawson said the rest of the gold miner's 113 staff have been vaccinated. Other companies contacted by the ABC have indicated similar responses by workers to the government's vaccine mandate.  \"It's a very large subset of the population of WA that work FIFO, so you're going to get a broad range of opinions,\" Mr Lawson told ABC Radio Perth. \"I think three out of a workforce of 113 is a pretty small subset that have elected not to proceed. \"We are a high-risk population, so for us it's our job [to get vaccinated]; I believe that. \"A lot of other people believe it's our duty to the rest of the people in the state to ensure that we don't create that source of infection and spread it.\" Warren Pearce, chief executive of the Perth-based Association of Mining and Exploration Companies, said NSW, Victoria and the Northern Territory had also mandated vaccinations for resource workers. \"The reality is companies have been reaching out to their employees for the past few months, saying 'this date (December 1) is coming, this is the requirement; you're going to have to be vaccinated or we can't keep you working, what do you want to do?',\" he said. \"I think there will be a little bit of a cooling-off period where companies will wait to see if people will change their minds. \"It will be interesting to see how that plays out. \"We haven't heard too much that has been massively concerning to us. \"We think most of our workforce will make the jump, albeit some will do it reluctantly, and we're just trying to make sure those people are supported and make the best-informed decision they can. Obviously, we want them to get vaccinated.\" mandatory vaccination could scare off workers during the current skills shortage WA Chamber of Minerals and Energy chief executive Paul Everingham said \"anecdotal evidence\" indicated the majority of the resource sector's workforce was either already fully vaccinated or in the process of being vaccinated. \"In the case of a worker not vaccinated by December 1, companies will work with them on a case-by-case basis in relation to their role and employment outcomes,\" he said. \"There is not necessarily a one-size-fits-all approach to managing these situations and companies will manage each instance in line with their legislative obligations and employment arrangements with those people.\" WA Mines Minister Bill Johnston said there was no indication there will be mass job losses in the resources sector. \"I don't have any expectation of that,\" he said. \"We're now on a very strong trajectory to get above 90 per cent vaccination. \"Nobody need lose their job; the mining industry is looking for labour, so I'd encourage everyone to get vaccinated and take a high-wage, high-skilled job in the mining industry.\" He said vaccination rates had risen dramatically in the aged care sector, after the government made it mandatory. Mr Johnston, who is double vaccinated, said that \"the only way out of COVID is through vaccination\" . \"Clearly vaccine mandates work, it gives workers that extra push to go get vaccinated and that's in the best interests of the community and the state.\" Perth-based mining giant Mineral Resources would not reveal how many of its 5000-strong workforce are being stood down due to the vaccine mandate, describing the situation as \"business as usual\". \"By tomorrow, every person at our sites – in Perth and across regional WA – will have been vaccinated in line with the government mandate,\" a company spokesman said."}, "/news/2021-11-30/30kmh-is-a-greens-socialist-policy-schrinner-says/100662478": {"description": "'They hate motorists': Brisbane Lord Mayor labels lower speed limit plea a 'socialist' Greens push", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Brisbane LNP Lord Mayor Adrian Schrinner says 30 kilometres per hour speed limits are a socialist Greens policy that will not be trialled in the council area and the CBD's 40kph speed limit is an appropriate speed. At Tuesday's council meeting Greens councillor Jonathan Sri asked Cr Schrinner what would be needed to trial a 30kph speed limit in the inner-city suburb of West End. \"More and more cities around the world are adopting speed limits of 30kph in recognition of the fact that lower speed limits can improve safety and convenience for active and public transport users, and in turn can help encourage a shift away from car dependence,\" Cr Sri said. \"I'm interested to understand how supportive you are of 30kph speed limits in denser inner-city neighbourhoods. \"What additional evidence or information [do] you want to see in order to consider supporting a trial of generalised 30kph speed limits of local and neighbourhood streets in the Gabba ward?\" Cr Schrinner said under his leadership as transport chair during the Campbell Newman-led council, Brisbane had pioneered introducing a 40kph speed limit to CBD streets. The measure, introduced in 2009, has significantly improved pedestrian safety and reduced serious accidents and deaths. In 2018, before he became Lord Mayor, Cr Schrinner ran a survey asking for public feedback on a push from bicycle safety groups and Labor councillors to reduce speed limits to 30kph. The council at the time concluded the 40kph limits were sufficient. \"When you hear a push for 30kph what you're hearing – read between the lines – is they really hate motorists and they want to punish them and they want them out of their cars,\" Cr Schrinner said. \"Which is Greens policy pretty much anywhere in the world. \"So whether it's a socialist mayor like the socialist mayor in Paris, or Greens councils elsewhere, it's a classic sign you've got a Greens council when they go for 30kph limits.\" Low-speed streets are about much more than road safety and increasing fine revenue. urgently needed Earlier this year, Paris introduced a 19mph or 30kph speed limit across the city, to reduce pollution and encourage a shift to active transport. Paris Deputy Mayor David Belliard told Radio France in August that the move was \"not an anti-car measure\" but was aimed at limiting vehicles to essential travel. The move follows Paris introducing kilometres of separated cycling lanes, reduced CBD car parking and a ban on older diesel cars. Meanwhile, central London has also dropped its speed limit to 20kph. In 2018, Yarra Council in Melbourne's inner-east dropped speed limits to 30kph in an Australian-first trial on Collingwood and Fitzroy streets. Speed limits in high pedestrian areas at Sydney's Northern Beaches were also dropped to 30kph as a trial last year, while other cities around Australia are considering similar moves. Cr Schrinner said 40kph was deemed a safe limit for school zones, so he did not support 30kph limits unless in a high-density shared zone such as Burnett Lane in the CBD, which is at 20kph. \"But on the general road network, no, I won’t be supporting 30kph,\" he said."}, "/news/2021-11-30/five-charges-dropped-over-st-patricks-day-bushfires/100662596": {"description": "Five charges dropped over St Patrick's Day bushfires", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Powercor has agreed to plead guilty to one charge relating to the St Patrick's Day fires that ravaged south-west Victoria in 2018. Energy Safe Victoria (ESV) initially charged Powercor with six offences after its investigation found the fires at Garvoc and Terang were caused by its infrastructure. a dozen homes, as well as farm buildings, fences and cattle But yesterday in the Warrnambool Magistrates Court, ESV agreed to withdraw five of the charges, including all those related to the Garvoc fire, which its investigation attributed to a rotten power pole that snapped in high winds. Powercor will now plead guilty to one remaining charge of failing to minimise risk of bushfire, which relates to powerlines that clashed in high winds at Terang, sparking one of the March 17 fires. ESV's initial investigation into the Garvoc fire alleged Powercor had failed to identify that a power pole was compromised. \"At around 9pm (on St Patrick's Day, 2018) the pole snapped and the high-voltage conductor hit the ground and ignited vegetation,\" an ESV statement said. \"The pole had a sizeable internal cavity caused by decay and termite infestation, which reduced its capacity to withstand the wind conditions.\" But with the dropping of the Garvoc charges by ESV yesterday, Powercor claimed its inspection and maintenance policies had been vindicated. \"We are satisfied with this outcome, as we strongly contend the necessary safety processes and procedures to maintain the network were followed, as approved by ESV at the time,\" a Powercor spokesperson said in a statement. \"In relation to the Terang fire, we have pled guilty to one charge of 'failing to minimise risk of bushfire'. \"We accept the clearance distance between powerlines on High Street Terang was not adequate to prevent the powerlines clashing in the high winds experienced on March 17, 2018. \"The 2018 fires in the south-west region were devastating and we acknowledge the impact it has had on the community.\" ESV chair Marnie Williams said in a statement that it was \"the duty of every major electricity company to keep the community safe from bushfire danger caused by the failure of their assets\". \"Energy Safe Victoria has held Powercor to account regarding the Terang fire and will not hesitate to hold other power companies to account for failing to manage and operate their electricity assets safely,\" she said. The long-running matter will return to court on December 13."}, "/news/2021-11-30/wa-growing-calls-to-withdraw-aboriginal-heritage-bill/100661832": {"description": "Prominent Australians call for WA government to pull 'unacceptable' Aboriginal heritage bill", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Calls are growing louder for the WA government to withdraw its Aboriginal Cultural Heritage legislation, with close to 150 eminent Australians putting their name to a letter of concern. Work to replace the outdated Aboriginal Heritage Act started years ago, but was not done in time to prevent the destruction of a sacred site at Juukan Gorge in WA's Pilbara region in May 2020. The WA government introduced the new legislation a fortnight ago and was using its parliamentary majority to rush the bill through before the end of the year. mining giant Rio Tinto to blast the 46,000 year old rock shelters But the bill has been met with shock and outrage by some traditional owners and Indigenous leaders, who fear it will not prevent another Juukan Gorge disaster and claim there had not been enough consultation. Among their concerns was that the WA Minister for Aboriginal Affairs would still have the final say in circumstances where traditional owners and mining companies could not agree. Also, the Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Council, which will be responsible for providing strategic oversight of the system, would only have a majority Aboriginal membership rather than full representation and members would be appointed by the minister. Further, the new laws gave no rights to traditional owners to appeal to the State Administrative Tribunal against decisions by the minister. In the letter to WA Premier Mark McGowan, the 146 signatories stated that the Bill would not recognise, protect and preserve Aboriginal cultural heritage. \"The bill does not allow for Aboriginal people to ensure heritage and site protection — without the agreement of the proponent and/or the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs,\" the letter stated. \"Aboriginal people have repeatedly requested improved legal protection of heritage sites, but the bill is weighted against Indigenous custodians in all processes involving heritage applications to conduct activities that disturb or destroy areas of cultural heritage. \"Respectfully, we request you to withdraw the Bill and ensure the law is co-designed with Aboriginal people to respect human rights and ensure a 'best practice' system to protect Aboriginal cultural heritage in our state.\" The wide range of signatories to the open letter included former Australian of the Year Fiona Stanley AC, Anglican Archbishop Kay Goldsworthy AO, businesswoman Janet Holmes-A-Court AC, former WA Premier Carmen Lawrence, and Ernie Dingo AM. Noongar human rights lawyer Dr Hannah McGlade said the Bill was being reviewed by the United Nations committee on race discrimination. \"We are sending a clear message to Premier McGowan that the bill, currently, is unacceptable to a great many people,\" she said. \"Prominent Australians stand with us in saying Aboriginal heritage and culture matters. This government must stop putting mining and economic interests above the rights of traditional owners to protect and care for sacred lands.\" The state opposition accused the government of ramming the legislation through parliament, after it introduced the Bill with more than 100 changes to the draft legislation in the second last sitting week of the legislative assembly. WA's parliament was expected to pass the legislation within a few weeks, after the state government declared it was urgent legislation and added an extra sitting week for the upper house to complete its debate before the end of the calendar year. The state government defended the consultation process and the legislation, saying the bill incorporated feedback from more than 100 workshops and information sessions attended by more than 1,400 people, 150 targeted and individual stakeholder meetings and more than 380 submissions. Mr McGowan said it was \"the most progressive cultural heritage legislation in the country\". \"It mandates agreement-making with traditional owners, in line with native title laws, and allows Aboriginal people to negotiate better outcomes for projects on their lands,\" he said in a statement. In parliament, Mr McGowan said the bill would ensure that the protection of Aboriginal cultural heritage would be improved and at the forefront of consideration when projects were developed. \"After three decades of failed attempts, we are introducing our new Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Act,\" he said. \"My view is that governments are elected to act, they are elected to make decisions and they are elected to improve things, and that is what this legislation will do.\""}, "/news/2021-11-30/covid-charges-against-restaurant-golden-boy-dropped/100661668": {"description": "COVID breach charges dropped against popular Adelaide restaurant", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Charges for breaching COVID-19 capacity restrictions have been dropped against popular Adelaide restaurant Golden Boy. was issued a $5,000 fine in November last year when South Australia was facing strict venue capacity restrictions At the time, emergency COVID-19 directions meant up to 100 seated diners were allowed in restaurants as long as that did not amount to more than one person per four square metres. Golden Boy licensee James Hillier was challenging the fine, with the charges against the restaurant now withdrawn in the Adelaide Magistrates Court. There has been no application for costs. Mr Hillier previously told the court he had received \"very little detail\" about why the venue was fined, and whether it could be challenged. In July, he told reporters he was confident he could reach a compromise with police. \"We were visited [by police] on the night, a headcount was done under the recently altered conditions that we were trading under … and between eight and 12 weeks later, we received an expiation,\" Mr Hillier said outside court earlier this year. \"I'm confident if we work through the evidence with the police, we will either reach some form of compromise, or we will accept the expiation as it stands.\" Mr Hillier said the venue had been doing its best to adhere to venue capacity restrictions at what had been a challenging time for the restaurant, as well as the industry in general. \"It's a multi-zone venue, but our staff are very vigilant — we have three managers on every night, we have multiple COVID marshals depending on the section they're working — and, so far, we're really happy with how it's gone,\" he said. \"Every business has difficulties — some more than others. It's just a challenging time for everyone, but we're no better or worse off than anyone else. \"Hopefully, once vaccination levels get up to a certain point, we can relax to a point where it's not so difficult to meet the conditions.\""}, "/news/2021-11-30/vickie-chapman-suspended-from-sa-parliament/100661544": {"description": "SA's Attorney-General Vickie Chapman suspended from parliament over misleading the house", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " South Australia's Attorney-General Vickie Chapman has been suspended from state parliament for six days for deliberately misleading the house. Crossbench MPs, excluding former Liberal Fraser Ellis, sided with Labor to pass a motion 23 votes to 22, finding Ms Chapman guilty of contempt for deliberately misleading parliament. The finding was possible because resignations of multiple MPs means the Marshall Liberal government no longer commands a majority in the 47-seat House of Assembly. The successful motion was prompted by statements the Attorney-General made to parliament regarding a decision she made as Planning Minister to refuse a timber port on Kangaroo Island. The motion said the misleading statements related to Ms Chapman's property and pecuniary interests, proposed transport routes and a government report on alternative wharf sites. last week resigned as Deputy Premier and Planning and Local Government Minister delegated her powers as Attorney-General to another minister She has steadfastly denied any wrongdoing, despite a parliamentary committee finding she had a conflict of interest and misled parliament. Ms Chapman gave a one-minute statement to the media from outside her lawyer's office, shortly after the vote occurred, saying she \"notes\" the decision. \"I indicate to you that I note, of course, the decision of the parliament and, of course, I'll be complying with six days' leave from the parliament as a result,\" Ms Chapman said. \"My view is well known in relation to the select committee of inquiry, and its alleged finding of facts, and that is a matter which the substance of which has now been considered by the Ombudsman. \"I welcome that and I'll be continuing the legal work necessary to prepare for that inquiry,\" she said. Ms Chapman also confirmed she will be contesting the next election to run for the seat of Bragg, which she has held since 2002. \"I will of course, otherwise, see you all at the election and of course proceed with the preparations for that campaign,\" Ms Chapman said. \"So, thank you very much for your attendance and I look forward to seeing you during the campaign.\" After speaking, Ms Chapman walked back into the legal offices without answering questions. Labor leader Peter Malinauskas said suspending Vickie Chapman was a necessary move to ensure the integrity of the parliament is maintained. \"If the parliament didn't sanction Vickie Chapman then that would be a green light for ministers of the Crown to walk into the people's parliament and knowingly mislead them with impunity,\" Mr Malinauskas said. \"That is not a standard that anyone should abide by, particularly the premier. \"Apparently he's comfortable with it, well the rest of the parliament isn't and that's why they've decided to act.\" Mr Malinauskas said the move only happened because the premier failed to act sooner. \"Had Steven Marshall shown leadership and actually dismissed Vickie Chapman… then the parliament wouldn't be doing what it did today,\" he said. \"There would be no need to suspend the Attorney-General, she would have paid penance for the significant act of wrongdoing that clearly, she has undertaken,\" Mr Malinauskas said. Labor originally proposed a nine-day suspension and also required Ms Chapman to publicly apologise for her conduct, but the motion was watered down. Mr Malinauskas was not aware of why the changes were made, but said it likely came after discussions with the crossbench. \"Naturally there's probably been negotiations that have gone on throughout the course of the morning,\" Mr Malinauskas said."}, "/news/2021-11-30/david-attenborough-asks-for-bee-quote-to-be-taken-down/100661118": {"description": "Sir David Attenborough writes to Adelaide shopping centre, asking for removal of falsely attributed quote", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " An Adelaide shopping centre has come under fire for falsely attributing a quote about the plight of bees to Sir David Attenborough, with the broadcaster personally writing to centre asking for the plaque to be removed. The plaque at the Westfield Tea Tree Plaza shopping centre in Adelaide's north-east caught the eye of science graduate Heath Hunter. \"Back in July some time I saw this really beautiful mural of honey bees … of all places it was actually down this little corridor leading towards the toilets,\" Mr Hunter told ABC Radio Adelaide. \"On the edge of the mural there was this tiny little plaque, maybe 10 centimetres wide, and it had these fake quotes from David Attenborough on there.\" The plaque quoted Sir David as saying: \"In the last five years the bee population has dropped by a third. If bees were to disappear from the face of the Earth, humans would have just four years left to live\". Mr Hunter said he recognised the quote, which has been attributed to other iconic figures as well. \"I know that they've been attributed to [Albert] Einstein in the past,\" he said. \"I'd seen it online a lot, but I'd never seen it engraved and displayed in a public place.\" Mr Hunter said he reached out to the mural's artist, who directed him to the shopping centre's management. \"I just explained to them that it's not true and would you mind removing it,\" he said. A couple of months later he returned to the centre and the plaque was still there, so he decided to go a step further. He wrote to Sir David and sent him a photo of the quote. \"He sent a little letter to me and said thanks for letting me know, and then there was a separate one attached,\" Mr Hunter said. The attached letter was to the shopping centre asking for the plaque to be taken down, which Sir David asked Mr Hunter to send on. \"The funny thing is, the letter from David Attenborough wasn't enough to make them remove it. \"I sent them that about three weeks ago, but they got a call from a journalist yesterday morning and it came down pretty quick.\" A spokesperson for Westfield Tea Tree Plaza confirmed the plaque had been taken down. \"We appreciate the customer bringing this to our attention,\" the spokesperson said. \"The plaque, including the quote, has been removed.\" As a lifelong Sir David fan, Mr Hunter will be hanging on to the letter he received. \"It's still in the envelope … I'll have to find somewhere to hang it.\""}, "/news/2021-11-30/independent-publishers-begin-negotiations-with-tech-giants/100660660": {"description": "Small news publishers band together in negotiations with tech giants Google, Facebook", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A group of small independent publishers from across Australia have banded together to negotiate with Google and Facebook to display their news content on their platforms. including the ABC The Public Interest Publishers Alliance includes the Tarrengower Times in central Victoria, and the Koondrook and Barham Bridge newspaper on the Murray River on the News South Wales border. They are part of the Australian Rural and Regional News network along with the Naracoorte Community News, Cape York Weekly, Narrandera Argus, and a host of other regional publications. The media code introduced last year by the federal government Within a couple of years the likes of Google and Facebook will devour more than half local ad revenues, leaving only crumbs for traditional media players. The decision at the time led Facebook to block access to news sites for several days before a compromise was made with the government. Alliance spokesperson James Harker-Mortlock said after the Seven West Media and Nine networks did deals with Google and Facebook, it left small publishers behind. \"The thing is that unless the federal government designates Facebook and Google, they are not compelled to negotiate with smaller publishers,\" he said. \"They can, if they wish, and I'm glad to hear that Google is at least sounding a bit more positive. Google's director of news partnerships for Asia and Pacific, Kate Beddoe, said the company had reached a number of commercial agreements with media outlets from across the country and that there were more than 100 Australian news publications now on Google News Showcase. \"This includes many independent publishers including Schwartz Media, Private Media, The Conversation, Times Group, as well as Independent Australia and Women’s Agenda who joined last month alongside AAP and SBS,\" she said. \"This follows an agreement reached in September with Country Press Australia, which represents 180 independently owned regional and local newspapers and online platforms across Australia.\" There are more than 300 independent publishers in Australia and Mr Harker-Mortlock said the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) must allow the publishers to be able to collective bargain. \"So what we do want to see though is that there's proper recognition of the work done by the smaller publishers who, across the board, probably have as many readers and listeners and users as the big end of town,\" he said. Chris Earle is the independent publisher and editor of the Loddon Herald in Wedderburn in Central Victoria. He is a former Liberal government adviser and a journalist, and started the Loddon Herald in January this year during the coronavirus pandemic. Mr Earle said while online and social media were tools that publishers use for the awareness and promotion of content, at the end of the day newspapers, whether they are print or online, remained a core part of many companies' business model. \"Look at the Loddon Herald, online versus print it's about 15 per cent online, and that really does correlate and validate the survey of rural and regional publishers – 70 per cent of people want local news in print,\" he said. The Buloke Times, a family-owned and run newspaper that has been going for 145 years, said 2020 was one of the toughest years for small businesses in recent memory as advertising revenue became harder to come by from local businesses. But there was also the birth of newspapers such as the Ararat Advocate — which started in May 2020 after the Ararat Advertiser shut down — and the Horsham Times, launched after the Wimmera Mail-Times ceased publication in the same year. Tech giants may have to make it clearer to consumers how their private information is used, get proper consent and face significant penalties for breaching privacy laws. According to the network of independent publishers, they are not banking their futures on royalties from the social media and search engine companies. \"It's not as though we're dependent upon this. I mean, it certainly would be a boost if we got it. But we're all very independent,\" Mr Harker-Mortlock said. \"If you go to our website and you see some interviews with some of the independent publishers, these are not people you're going to just knock over in an afternoon. They're very tough and resilient.\""}, "/news/2021-11-30/westpac-asic-charging-dead-customers/100660524": {"description": "Westpac admits to charging 11,000 dead customers, ASIC sues for 'widespread' breaches", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) has launched six court cases against Westpac for alleged, widespread compliance failures that affected thousands of deceased consumers. Having admitted to the allegations in all the lawsuits, the bank has agreed to compensate around $80 million to the estates of its affected customers. In addition to the compensation payment, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) is also seeking orders from the Federal Court for the bank to be fined $113 million. Westpac has agreed to pay these penalties. However, these orders will need to be approved by the court. The bank's list of wrongdoing includes charging fees to its dead customers, double-charging insurance policies and failing to adequately disclose its fees to financial advice customers. \"It is unprecedented for ASIC to file multiple proceedings against the same respondent at the same time,\" ASIC deputy chair Sarah Court said. \"However, these were exceptional circumstances. ASIC had numerous Westpac-related matters under investigation through the course of 2021, and we decided to expedite those matters for consideration by the court at the earliest opportunity.\" The bank admitted that, over a decade, it had charged in excess of $10 million worth of advice fees to more than 11,000 customers for financial advice, even though they had already died. Another failure was Westpac sending \"duplicate insurance policies\" to more than 7,000 customers for the same property at the same time. This resulted in some customers paying for two or more policies unnecessarily. Westpac's $1.3 billion penalty is the largest in Australian corporate history. So what exactly did the bank do, or not do, that warranted such a big hit? Michael Janda explains. Westpac was also accused of seeking payments from 329 customers for premiums, even though they had not consented to entering into insurance policies. The regulator also took issue with the bank's subsidiary, BT Funds Management, charging its members insurance premiums that included commission payments. That was despite the fact commissions were banned under the Future of Financial Advice legislation. BT Funds is remediating in excess of $12 million to more then 8,000 affected members who were wrongly charged. Furthermore, ASIC claims that at least 25,000 customers of BT Financial Advice, Magnitude and Securitor — Westpac licensees that are no longer operating — were ripped off by more than $7 million. This amount relates to \"contribution fees for financial advice\" that were not adequately disclosed. The corporate watchdog also accused Westpac of allowing around 21,000 deregistered company accounts to remain open. An alleged problem was that Westpac continued to charge fees on those accounts and allowed funds to be withdrawn from these accounts. However, those fees should have been transferred to ASIC or the Commonwealth. ASIC also alleges that Westpac sold consumer credit card and flexi-loan debt to debt purchasers with the wrong interest rates. These debt onsale rates were higher than what Westpac was contractually allowed to charge, which led to more than 16,000 customers, who were \"likely to be in financial distress\", being overcharged. All up, ASIC is taking action against Westpac and its following divisions: Advance Asset Management, Asgard Capital Management, BT Funds Management, BT Funds Management No. 2, BT Portfolio Services, Securitor Financial Group and Magnitude Group. \"The conduct and breaches alleged in these proceedings caused widespread consumer harm and ranged across Westpac’s everyday banking, financial advice, superannuation and insurance businesses,\" Ms Court said. Just how and why did Australia's oldest bank find itself accused of bankrolling paedophiles and short-changing taxpayers, and unable to say who was behind $11 billion in suspect offshore transactions? A \"common aspect\" of these matters has been \"poor systems, poor processes and poor governance\", which suggests as \"overall poor compliance culture within Westpac at the relevant time\", the deputy chair said. \"Customers are entitled to have trust and confidence in Westpac being able to deliver what it promises, without suffering financial harm. Westpac must urgently improve its systems and culture to ensure these systemic failures do not continue.\" Westpac's chief executive Peter King said his bank had \"fallen short of our standards and the standards our customers expect of us\". \"The issues raised in these matters should not have occurred, and our processes, systems and monitoring should have been better. We are putting things right and unreservedly apologise to our customers. He also said the bank has \"cooperated with ASIC through the investigations and the process to get to this resolution today”. “This outcome is an important step forward for us as we continue to fix issues and build stronger risk foundations.\""}, "/news/rural/2021-11-30/competing-royal-dsm-csiro-technology-to-reduce-cattle-emissions/100650618": {"description": "Can the CSIRO beat Dutch corporate giant DSM to get low emissions cattle feed to market?", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The race is on to commercialise a product that will significantly reduce methane emissions in cattle around the world, but can Australia's CSIRO beat the Dutch corporate giant DSM to the punch? The world is scrambling to hold global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, and over 100 countries have committed to reduce methane emissions by 30 per cent in the next decade. The prize is to commercialise a feed additive that can cut emissions in cattle and help that industry get to net zero. Australia's CSIRO is the Johnny-come-lately, the research minnow competing against a Dutch corporate giant, but they have grand ambitions. In collaboration with Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) and James Cook University (JCU) they have developed a product that cuts emissions in cows by 90 per cent. Michael Battaglia, the director of the collaboration's FutureFeed product, said the organisation wants to \"change the world from Australia\". Livestock farming and the meat industry are responsible for 18 per cent of total global greenhouse gas emissions.  On average, a single cow releases over 250 litres of methane per day, but these two products can block the production of methane in the cows stomach.  Mark van Nieuwland heads up the global program for Royal DSM, employing 23,000 people, and their product Bovaer. \"It's a feed additive that gets mixed into the diet of the cow. It acts in the rumen and works instantly,\" he said. The product has been extensively tested over ten years in more than 45 on-farm trials and reported on in more than 48 peer-reviewed studies, according to DSM.  It has signed agreements with Brazil and Chile to approve the product's use, and is partnering with the world's biggest meat processor JBS to commence using the product.  \"They will first start with their own feedlots and then I imagine they'll look at the other beef they process, but they are also well connected to the food service industry and the retail sector,\" Mr van Nieuwland said. DSM announced at COP 26 that they were investing $180 million into a plant in Scotland to start large scale commercial production of Bovaer. The company also received a positive European Food Safety Agency opinion on Bovaer, something that will make a big difference to companies like JBS wanting to sell meat into the EU. The CSIRO has a lot of catching up to do, but in late 2020 it received a Food Planet Prize for its product based on the seaweed asparagopsis.  Michael Battaglia from FutureFeed thinks the Australian product will work well for businesses looking for an organically-sourced product. \"Some are going to be looking for the lowest cost irrespective of the nature of chemical intervention … and others will look for an organically sourced, healthy product,\" he said. Mr Battaglia said he was not concerned about the progress DSM had made on gaining approvals in places like Brazil, the world's largest beef producer.  \"You don't need an approval to feed seaweed to livestock, its a natural product,\" he said. FutureFeed is working on a system that would enable consumers to claim carbon credits for using the product, but there is more work to be done. \"You can't generate a carbon credit until we develop that full quality assurance program around the product.\" Ultimately both products will enable the livestock sector to reduce emissions to help keep global temperature rise to 1.5 degrees or less. Tim Baxter from the Climate Council is encouraged by the competition. \"What's exciting about this is that you have this creative tension between two different companies with two different solutions tackling same problem, and that means the race is on,\" he said."}, "/news/2021-11-30/asx-global-markets-rebound-investors-assess-omicron/100660394": {"description": "Investors cling to hope as Omicron variant spreads, ASX loses momentum", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The Australian market staged a big rebound on Tuesday morning, as investors put aside their concerns about the Omicron coronavirus variant and its economic impact. But investors turned cautious again in afternoon trade, with the ASX 200 closing 0.2 per cent higher at 7,256 points, not far off from its seven-week low. The benchmark index had jumped by as much as 1.3 per cent at its highest point, before the momentum fizzled out. Some of the best performing stocks were Credit Corp (+8.6pc), Orocobre (+7.9pc), and Uniti Group (+7.8pc). Travel stocks made a strong recovery, led by Webjet (+5.2pc) and Flight Centre (+4.5pc). Collins Foods' share price jumped 12.6 per cent, and was today's best performer as its Europe business recovered to their pre-pandemic strength. The company, which owns a large network of KFC franchises, announced that its European revenue jumped 31.7 per cent to $84.7 million. \"widespread\" compliance failures APRA published a set of rules requiring banks to hold more capital Shares of St Barbara (-4.3pc), Perseus Mining (-4.1pc), Bega Cheese (-2.8pc), Cochlear (-3.9pc), and Fortescue Metals (-3.4pc) experienced steep falls. The Australian dollar was slightly weaker at 71.1 US cents (after a 0.4 per cent drop). The local currency \"remains vulnerable to more downside in our view while Omicron uncertainty remains\", Commonwealth Bank currency strategist Kim Mundy said. \"Any evidence that current vaccines are less effective against Omicron can push the Australian dollar towards 70 US cents.\" Overseas stocks rallied, oil prices bounced and gold lost ground as markets latched onto hopes the new variant of concern would prove milder than initially feared. News of the variant triggered alarm and a sell-off on Friday that wiped roughly $2.8 trillion off the value of global stocks, as countries slapped on new restrictions for fear the variant could resist vaccinations and up-end a nascent economic reopening after a two-year global pandemic. The World Health Organization said on Monday the variant posed a very high risk of causing a surge in infections. \"We're all still reaching around in the dark and will need more data, but things do seem a bit more hopeful than they were on Friday,\" BlueBay Asset Management chief investment officer Mark Dowding said. Wall Street's main indices ended their day higher. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained rose 0.7 per cent to 35,136 points. The S&P 500 had gained 1.3 per cent to 4,655 and the Nasdaq Composite had added 1.9 per cent to 15,783. Bargain buying in technology stocks drove the S&P and Nasdaq sharply higher, indicating investors were likely favouring stocks regarded as pandemic resistant. \"People are looking at it as a little bit of a sale on Friday and an opportunity to get into some areas of the market that got hit hard,\" Robert Pavlik, senior portfolio manager at Dakota Wealth Management, said. The pan-European STOXX 600 index rose 1.2 per cent and MSCI's gauge of stocks across the world gained 0.4 per cent. Oil prices rallied more than 5 per cent on Monday. But that was after they plunged more than 10 per cent last Friday in their biggest one-day drop since April 2020. The international oil benchmark, Brent crude futures, lifted back to $US72.85 a barrel overnight after posting five straight weeks of losses. Speculation that oil-producing group OPEC+ (which includes Russia, Saudi Arabia and other nations) might pause an output increase in response to the spread of Omicron aided the oil price rebound. Spot gold slipped 0.5 per cent to $US1,782.56 an ounce.  "}, "/news/2021-11-30/sydney-news-teacher-strike-to-go-ahead/100660270": {"description": "NSW Now: Teachers ignore demands to cancel next week's planned strike", "article_category": "business", "article_text": "   The NSW Teachers Federation says a strike planned for next week will go ahead, despite the Industrial Relations Commission demanding it be called off. Public school teachers across the state voted on the weekend to strike on December 7 over pay and staff shortages. In a ruling last night, the commission ordered the federation not to strike and to issue a public statement revoking its direction to strike by 4pm today. But Teachers Federation president Angelo Gavrielatos said teachers had been left with no choice but to proceed with the industrial action because the government was not listening to their concerns. \"The teacher shortages are too large and their cause — uncompetitive salaries and unmanageable workloads — [are] too great for teachers and principals not to proceed with this action,\" he said. In a statement, NSW education secretary Georgina Harrisson called on the federation to follow the directions and \"put students first\". \"Parents want their children in school and no-one needs another day out of the classroom after such a disruptive year,\" she said. The NSW Labor Party is supporting a push to return warnings signs to mobile speed cameras. In November 2020 the NSW government announced warning signs would no longer be displayed on speed cameras, saying operations should not be highly visible to \"generate an anywhere-anytime expectation of detection\". A NSW parliamentary inquiry is now investigating the viability of unmarked speed cameras. Former roads minister Duncan Gay, who worked to make cameras more visible, said the government made the wrong decision to move to a more covert system. Shadow Minister for Roads John Graham said the current rules were not supported by the public and suggested removing the signs was a \"revenue-raising\" measure. NSW Police will carry out forensic searches today as part of continuing investigations into the disappearance of model Revelle Balmain, who vanished 27 years ago. Ms Balmain was 22 when she disappeared in the Kingsford area, in Sydney's eastern suburbs, in 1994. Personal items belonging to the part-time escort — including a make-up bag, keys and a shoe — were found scattered near Ainslie Street in Kingsford after she disappeared. Police say they are exploring multiple new lines of inquiry, with searches set to take place at properties in Bellevue Hill, Bondi Beach and Potts Point. No-one has been charged in relation to her disappearance. However a coronial inquest in 1999 found Ms Balmain died at the hands of a person or persons unknown. In May this year the NSW government announced a $1 million reward for information that assisted investigators with their inquiries.  A man has been charged over the theft of a rare 19th-century gold seal from an exhibit at Parramatta in Sydney's west. In May this year, explorer John Oxley's fob watch was taken from its exhibition case where it was being displayed at Old Government House, Parramatta. The gold seal is made of engraved rock crystal and is mounted in an 18-carat gold converted fob watch. A 43-year-old man faces multiple charges, including damage property by fire or explosion. The gold seal has not been recovered. Cloudy. Medium chance of showers. Sydney  17 24 Parramatta  15 22"}, "/news/rural/2021-11-30/plastic-environment-waste-recycling-queensland-manufacturing/100647626": {"description": "Tonnes of plastic farm waste piling up as frustrated recycling business waits for state grant", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A Townsville-based recycling business aiming to reduce waste by making farm and landscaping supplies from discarded plastic is still waiting for funding certainty more than a year after it was promised. QPlas plans to make wood-plastic composite products for landscaping and farming. In 2020 the company applied to the Resource Recovery Industry Development Program (RRIDP) for capital to begin operations. Company chair Sandra Richards said QPlas was told by local MP Scott Stewart its pitch was successful after applications for the second round of funding closed. \"He came out and shook my hand and said, 'Congratulations on the grant', and that was 13 months ago,\" Ms Richards said. Only one grant was issued from the second stream of the RRIDP — $8 million went to a South Australian company for expansion into south-eastern Brisbane. QPlas said it would employ about 30 workers if production began. Ms Richards said the company was told in February it was placed into a new grant program, the Queensland Recycling Modernisation Fund, but was yet to hear anything since. \"The program didn't even open until July and closed in September,\" she said. \"By that time we were really needing to get started, we needed to get working capital.\" Mr Stewart said in a statement he had only spoken to QPlas to congratulate it on progressing the grant to the next stage of the process. He added that grants were assessed independently by the Department of State Development. A spokeswoman for the department said it had transitioned QPlas’s application from RRIDP to the Queensland Recycling Modernisation Fund, because it was eligible for that fund. She did not clarify why it was unsuccessful in gaining RRIDP funding. The company has invested $1.5m of its shareholders' money into equipment — now gathering dust at the Shaw site — used for manufacturing the wood-plastic composites. The factory would use thousands of tonnes of farm and hospital plastic waste, along with hardwood chips, to make items to replace wood and plastic. The Waste Recycling Industry Association of Queensland (WRIQ) has published a report on investment in regional initiatives funded through levy collection in Queensland. The WRIQ said Queensland was the last state government to sign up to the Recycling Modernisation Fund and was lagging behind on waste and recycling targets. With a 54-per-cent resource recovery rate, the state is a considerable way behind national leader South Australia, which has an 83-per-cent recovery rate. The WRIQ report recommends the state government do more to support the development of a secondary resources sector, prioritising recycled product ahead of the use of imported and virgin materials. WRIQ noted that weaknesses in the grant system meant smaller operators such as QPlas could not compete against larger, more sophisticated businesses, especially given the short time-frames they had to apply. The paper recommends low-interest loans be considered, as well as incentives for the use of recycled materials over virgin products. Desperate farmers have stockpiled unwanted farm plastic used to grow vegetable crops at Bowen, between Townsville and Mackay. Irrigation tape and sheeting mulch is the most common waste in the region. Bowen farmer and Bowen Gumlu Growers Association president Carl Walker said disposing of plastic posed a big challenge. \"The farmers wholly support this recycling measure. We're on board with it and hope the business succeeds,\" he said. Previously, plastic from farms has been burnt or placed in landfill but such disposal is now illegal. With mounds of plastic waste piling up in depots around the region, the Whitsunday Regional Council has been approached to find safe storage areas ahead of the flood-prone summer season. With the Bowen region growing $500m worth of produce annually, Mr Walker said he believed there were significant opportunities for recycling waste into useful products. \"The tomato stakes we use are hardwood,\" he said. \"They're expensive and prone to breaking, there's no way to recycle them. \"Using these composite wood-plastic stakes, they can be recycled again if they break. \"We could also buy picking bins made of this material.\""}, "/news/rural/2021-11-30/us-allies-benefit-from-china-trade-row-with-australia/100659480": {"description": "US, allies reap benefits as fallout from Australia's trade row with China hits $17b", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australia's closest security allies, led by the United States, have been the biggest beneficiaries of Beijing's campaign of economic coercion against Canberra, a report has found.  More than 18 months after China kicked off the trade war against Australia amid a series of spats between the two countries, the University of Technology Sydney found it was Canberra's partners who were picking up much of the slack. UTS's Australia-China Relations Institute has released figures that show the value of 12 Australian exports to China affected by sanctions fell by $US12.6 billion ($17.3b) in the first nine months of this year compared with 2019. During the same period, the value of US exports of the same commodities increased by $US4.6 billion ($6.3 billion), while those of Canada and New Zealand jumped by $US1.1b and $US786 million, respectively. Insitute director James Laurenceson said the data showed Australia's pursuit of closer security ties with the US and other western democracies was not stopping its allies from capitalising on its trade predicament. \"Of course, the US is our great security ally and strategic mate,\" Dr Laurenceson said. \"Sometimes we get very excited by US-based commentators, and indeed senior Biden officials, saying, 'We will stand shoulder to shoulder with Australia.' \"But actually when you dig into the trade data, the United States is the country that's stealing more Australian sales in China than any other country. \"So strategic friends can be fierce commercial rivals and that's exactly what we're seeing.\" Over several months from May 2020, Australian exporters were hit with a series of crippling trade strikes by Beijing over grievances that included \"siding with the US' anti-China campaign\". were coal, barley, beef, timber, lobster and wine in some cases, the value of the targeted trades fell to zero Dr Laurenceson said the actions of the US and other Australian allies were understandable and in the national interests of those countries. it was imperative Australia faced up to the cost of its own actions He said the university's analysis had shown that despite the increasingly popular belief that western economies were \"decoupling\" from a bloc led by China, the numbers suggested otherwise. \"I'm not suggesting we should back down because Beijing threatens us,\" he said. \"But what I am suggesting is that we should be very clear on what the costs are and who is bearing those costs — and it is Australia and Australian producers alone.\" Perth USAsia Centre research director Jeffrey Wilson said any increase in sales by the US and other allies to China was coincidental rather than coordinated. He said companies traded with each other, not governments. \"What we've seen since China's trade sanctions against Australia is a great reordering of who trades with whom,\" Dr Wilson said. \"It's a little bit like when you dam a river in a complex river system, the water finds other ways to flow complexly around the barrier you put in place. \"And so what we're really seeing is international commercial businesses and markets adjusting around that dam wall between Australia and China, basically on commercial grounds.\" Dr Wilson noted countries not regarded as Australia's allies, such as Russia, had also benefited from the trade row by increasing the sales of goods such as coal, which highlighted the unpredictable nature of the fallout. He argued that a bigger issue at play was China's refusal to play by the rules of global trade. \"It's not the role of government to tell companies who they should sell to,\" Dr Wilson said. \"But it is the role of government to enforce global rules, and so much of the Australia-US discussion is on that basis. \"At no point does Australia ask the US to stop selling things to other countries — our request is that we work together to ensure China complies with a set of international rules it agreed to … and over the last 18 months has felt simply doesn't apply in its dealing with Australia.\" At Pingrup, a grain growing town 355 kilometres south-east of Perth, Doug Smith's barley harvest is well underway. WA is expecting a record barley crop of 5.3 million tonnes. Up until last year, much of the crop would have been bound for the world's most lucrative barley market — China. But after Beijing blacklisted Australia's barley exports, Mr Smith said the grain was destined for other markets that paid much less. \"Most of our barley now goes into probably the cheapest barley market in the world, which is the Saudi feed market,\" Mr Smith said. \"And just at the moment we're seeing a major disparity between the prices we're getting paid as growers in WA and what the international price for feed barley actually is. \"We're seeing disparity of around $140 [a tonne].\" Defence Minister Peter Dutton suggested Taiwan could be the first domino to fall \"Other countries have shown that you don't actually have to sell your soul to do business and I think you need to be able to negotiate something that's fair,\" he said. \"I think there is still room for that. \"It's probably not quite at that stage, but I'm hoping that we're getting closer to some more common sense.\""}, "/news/2021-11-30/three-year-waitlist-for-childcare-in-rural-queensland/100659306": {"description": "Three-year waitlists as rural Australia's 'horror' childcare situation worsens", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Stephanie Massey turns grey when she recalls spending her pregnancy frantically chasing childcare providers to secure a spot for her unborn baby. The Mount Isa resident is one of thousands of parents across the country bearing the brunt of an industry plagued by severe staff shortages. \"I put Cameron's name down before he was even in the womb,\" Ms Massey said. \"I spent the next 10 months chasing providers, only to be told we were still on the waitlist.\" St Mary MacKillop Early Learning Centre director Nadia Russo says the issue is not new or isolated. \"This is happening right across the board, particularly in rural areas,\" she said. \"But the solutions are complex and nothing is really being done.\" Some parents in the outback Queensland city have waited years to get their kids through the door. \"We have been on waitlists for two years now,\" Devin Vonder said. \"By the time she gets a spot it will be time to go to school.\" Like Ms Massey, Jennifer Beetham did her best to get in early. \"When I had my eldest, I put her on the waitlist while I was pregnant and finally got a call when she was three,\" Ms Beetham said. When mum-of-three Jacqueline Warren found out she was pregnant, the local childcare providers knew before anyone else. \"Everyone knows the first person you tell when you find out you're pregnant is a childcare centre,\" she said. Childcare worker Heidi Macdonald said the waitlist at the Mount Isa Day Nursery and Kindergarten was in excess of 300. \"And it's growing each year,\" she said. Ms Massey turned to private family day care, where children are placed in the home of the carer. \"I had to go back to work, and moving to the coast where there's more childcare centres wasn't an option,\" she said. While the family day care Cameron attended was run by a qualified professional, Ms Massey felt her son did not receive the care he needed. \"She was a lovely lady, but it was obvious there were too many children there and she was flat out,\" Ms Massey said. \"We didn't know what was happening with him; whether he'd had his nappy changed, if he'd had a sleep, what he was eating. \"Some days he wouldn't sleep the whole day and would come home and crash, so we never got to spend time with him. It makes you really anxious because you think he's only little — he wasn't even one by that point.\" Eventually, the couple rearranged their work shifts to look after Cameron, with Mr Massey working night shifts to care for their son during the day. Ms Macdonald said while family day care was an excellent option, some unregulated providers took advantage of desperate parents. \"The current situation with child care is a horror story and, unfortunately, there are illegitimate businesses that capitalise on that,\" she said.  \"That's where parents are at; they'll give their kids to anyone so they can go back to work to support their family.\" The common complaint among childcare providers is a lack of workers. \"We need more staff, at least another eight to 10 people,\" Ms Russo said. At the Mount Isa Day Nursery and Kindergarten, the stress is the same.  \"It is impossible to get staff; it's the biggest problem here,\" Ms Macdonald said. Early Childhood Australia chief executive Sam Page said low wages were crippling the industry, which was already hit hard during the pandemic. \"I do believe there are quite a lot of people in the community who have the qualifications, but have decided not to work in the sector due to low wages for the stress they have to manage,\" she said. \"We need to treat early childhood education as though it is an essential service. It's part of the education system. \"This is a missed opportunity for governments because by addressing the issues of supply and affordability, you prop up the economy,\" she said. A spokesperson for the Queensland Department of Education, Skills and Employment said it was responding to the situation through several programs, including free or low-fee training options for childcare qualifications, encouraging employers to take on trainees through a wage subsidy, and reducing the cost of early learning qualifications by 42 per cent. After 15 months, Cameron Massey was finally accepted into a childcare centre. \"Life is much better now,\" Ms Massey said. \"My husband jokes that if he ever loses his job, he'll open up a day care centre.\""}, "/news/2021-11-30/airbnb-stayz-covid-cancellation-refund-bookings/100658860": {"description": "Why this short-term rental provider is refusing COVID refunds – and charging people to re-book", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Ross Mathieson and Zaita Oldfield weren't expecting another winter of rolling lockdowns.  So when they booked a night at a Victorian country home for a getaway with friends, the Melbourne-based couple didn't pay too much attention to their Airbnb host's cancellation policy. \"I just wanted to book a nice holiday and I didn't want to be going over the terms and conditions,\" Ross says. \"I just thought, things will be fine.\" As it turned out, the couple made the Airbnb booking just one day before a surprise snap lockdown was announced for Melbourne on August 5. They hoped the lockdown would be lifted by the time of their trip on August 14. But it ended up dragging on for months. As their booking loomed, Ross assumed they'd get a refund due to being under lockdown in Melbourne, and wrote to their Airbnb host asking for their money back. \"My natural feeling is that a refund would have been most appropriate in that situation. We had no prior warning that a lockdown was going to happen.\" The couple were \"disgusted\" by their host's response. \"Ross,\" the reply cited by the ABC reads, \"people are still coming up to the cottage.\" \"No need to cancel. We travel to (Melbourne) all the time. It's a bit rudiculous (sic) to impose a 5km limit on people.\" Ross says that message left them \"furious\". \"I'd rather took exception to that suggestion that we break the law just to keep our booking,\" he says. Ross and Zaita never got a refund for their $350 booking. And the reason why they can't do much about this all comes down to the booking terms they signed. The Airbnb they paid for had a \"firm\" cancellation policy, which stipulates that they weren't entitled to any refund at all when cancelling less than 7 days before they were due to arrive at the accommodation. \"I hadn't realised that the host's cancellation policy was what you get, and there's no consumer law to over override that,\" Ross says. The couple has since cancelled their Airbnb account. Airbnb – a US company worth more than $150 billion – doesn't own the short-term rentals on its website. Instead, individuals or home management companies list their own properties. Airbnb lets these \"hosts\" pick from various cancellation policies when listing a property for rent. choices that hosts can pick range Airbnb declined an interview with the ABC and didn't directly respond to questions. Airbnb did offer full refunds to people impacted by COVID lockdowns and border closures at the very start of the pandemic. But by March 2020, it reverted to letting hosts implement their own cancellation policies again. In a generic statement, Airbnb said this policy was \"designed to appropriately balance the needs of hosts and guests\". \"We remind everyone that prior to booking, guests can view the cancellation policy selected for that particular listing by its individual host,\" the company said. It's understood that Airbnb hosts with tight policies can use their discretion to ask the company to refund money. But again, this area is not regulated and the company wouldn't be interviewed about it. There are no set laws governing what companies should do with refunding consumers in the event of COVID lockdowns or border closures. This is not just an issue that is impacting short-term rental providers but also airlines, hotels and travel agents. has \"guidelines\" for third-party booking sites, which includes companies like Stayz and Airbnb These guidelines say consumers \"need to seek a remedy from the third-party booking site\" in the event of a cancelled service due to government restrictions. That essentially means that consumers are at the behest of whatever terms and conditions they bought a product under, and that consumers may be able to negotiate for a credit or refund. In a statement, Stayz – which is owned by Expedia – said it agrees with these guidelines \"in principle\". But ultimately, it says, it's just an \"online marketplace\" that \"isn't involved in the rental transaction\". allows its hosts to choose from are less flexible than Airbnb \"If a strict cancellation policy is in place and a refund is being requested, the guest can appeal to the host to ask for a refund outside of the policy,\" Stayz says in its statement. \"The host does have the ability to override their policy, but it is their discretion if they wish to do so. At Stayz we do not mediate these requests. \"In the event that the traveller who is entitled to a refund due to a more flexible cancellation policy and has not heard from the host, we encourage the traveller to contact our customer service team to help mediate.\" Stayz also confirmed that it holds onto its service fees when somebody is not granted a refund, even during COVID. \"At the beginning of the pandemic, where guests had made bookings before there was widespread knowledge of COVID-19 and the potential disruption to travel, Stayz refunded all traveller service fees by default. \"We do not refund the traveller service fee by default now, but consider on a case-by-case basis.\" Airbnb also takes a cut of each listing in the form of \"service fees\". It declined to reveal to the ABC what financial net it has taken in Australia since the start of the pandemic in the form of un-refunded COVID cancellations. but there are tight rules \"The situation at the moment is that (these short-term rental companies) do tend to leave people in the lurch a bit,\" Jodi Bird from consumer advocacy group Choice says. \"What we find tricky in this situation is that Airbnb might take money for making the booking itself. But when it comes to actually mediating in the cancellation they tend to take a step back. \"So if they're going to take the money, they really need to be helping consumers and the hosts more in mediating some kind of compensation when these incidences occur.\" While Choice's Jodi Bird says consumers have been left in a \"buyer beware\" situation, he appreciates that the current situation also isn't easy for hosts dealing with rolling cancellations and lost revenue. \"So it would really help if people just only look for flexible cancellation policies. It would also help if the hosts who are willing to provide those policies [were] rewarded for taking that risk,\" he adds. Airbnb says almost two-thirds of its listings are set to offer \"flexible\" or \"moderate\" cancellation policies. Glenys Bibby is one of the Airbnb hosts trying to do the right thing by her visitors. Glenys and her husband are retired and operate an Airbnb out the back of their house in the coastal town Queenscliff as their only source of income. Its listing has a \"flexible\" policy that allows full refunds up to 24 hours before arrival. Glenys prefers to negotiate with people impacted by COVID lockdowns to reschedule – which means she holds onto revenue – but she has also been going into bat with Airbnb for people who just want all their money back. \"I think it's good for the reputation of the Airbnb. And it's good for our reputation for (our accommodation),\" she says. \"And I think it's also good for the reputation for the town.\" But it's a lot of work for little financial benefit. Since COVID, the couple's Airbnb has had 76 cancellations equating to 194 nights. They've had around a dozen people re-reschedule their bookings up to 10 times. Rescheduling bookings, contacting Airbnb for people's full refunds, and replying to messages from confused travellers can take up \"hours\" of Glenys' day. \"It's gets a little annoying because we could go out for lunch, and then I'm sitting on my phone answering emails,\" Glenys says. She understands that consumers get agitated about being offered refunds – but also thinks they need to understand the stress that an unprecedented pandemic has put on hosts too. \"They've got no idea what it's like for us. Absolutely no idea,\" she says. She doesn't want Airbnb to bring in a set policy for cancellation during the pandemic. That's because she believes her decision to offer refunds gives her an advantage over less flexible hosts. \"Hopefully they'll book with us once they see our policy is fully flexible,\" she says. Luxico is one of only seven accommodation companies in the world that's officially partnered with Airbnb. It manages around 300 high-end properties across the country on behalf of property owners. Listings are put both on Luxico's website and indirectly on Airbnb. \"Our booking terms and conditions are strict under normal circumstances,\" Luxico's co-founder Alexandra Ormerod says. \"But a pandemic isn't a normal circumstance. \"COVID isn't anyone's fault. Everyone's doing their best to try and muddle through.\" Since the pandemic started, Luxico has had 551 cancellations worth $5.8 million. It's been mostly issuing credit notes for these cancellations. However, it has also given out $480,000 in direct refunds, largely to international bookings. bookings made directly via the Luxico website are only offered a credit note due to COVID issues. There's also a booking fee of $280 when people use that credit to reschedule All of the funds are kept in a trust until they're redeemed. \"We don't permit refunds, unless there is very much special circumstances involved,\" Alexandra says. \"The majority of people that are holding credits now, they booked knowing that COVID was a thing. And they booked knowing what the COVID cancellation terms were. \"So, there really aren't many circumstances that should require that being reviewed.\" Only about 15 per cent of Luxico's bookings come indirectly through Airbnb listings. Dealing with COVID cancellations through that website is even more complicated. Alexandra says that's because Airbnb doesn't have a setting to allow credit notes to be issued. So Luxico simply sets mid-tier cancellation settings. \"That does make it difficult in some circumstances for guests to receive funds back because, more often than not, there'll be a deposit that's retained,\" she says. \"If they want to try to recoup a deposit that's been retained, they'd have to go through Airbnb and try and get that back. \"It is sometimes challenging for consumers to recoup the Airbnb service fees. That's part of their model. They need to make money too.\" Alexandra says they've gone with these policies because managing rolling lockdowns was taking its toll on business operations. Luxico has actually taken on more staff during COVID. \"It was a really strange situation to be in because we actually needed more staff to deal with cancellations and sales inquiries, yet nobody was actually putting their credit card down to book a property,\" she says. \"Whenever those borders change with a huge influx of cancellations, and often then re-booking them and then having to cancel them again, it's really emotionally taxing. \"And in fact, the biggest issue that we face within the industry at the moment is burnout.\" Given all the complications the industry is facing, Alexandra would actually like to see more regulation of her industry and how it deals with refunds during ongoing lockdowns and border closures. \"I would definitely support a blanket policy,\" she says. \"I think it's really challenging for businesses to try to navigate these things themselves,\" she says. In a statement, the ACC said it is \"aware of calls for law reform\" to address concerns in the travel industry. \"Australian Consumer Law regulators are undertaking a review and any reform is ultimately a question for governments,\" the statement said."}, "/news/2021-11-30/vicforests-accused-of-failing-to-regenerate-logged-forests/100652148": {"description": "Ed was browsing satellite photos of Mount Delusion when he noticed something odd about the forest", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Sydney architect Ian Moore likes the feel of timber from Victoria's ash forests. It's marketed as \"Victorian Ash\" or \"Vic Ash\" and sold by Australian Sustainable Hardwood (ASH). \"Ash is a really nice timber for me to use, which is similar to American oak and European oak,\" he says.  The blonde colour, according to Mr Moore, means it brings the warmth of wood without the orange or red hues that come with some other hardwoods. Central to Ian Moore's work is sustainability and Victorian ash is pitched as \"the most environmentally friendly building product available\". \"When I first looked at it, you know, you read the material about sustainable logging… I would have said that it was a very good choice from a sustainable point of view,\" says Mr Moore. Victorian ash is sourced from Victoria's lush native forests, logged by the state government-owned logging company VicForests, and processed at the Heyfield mill, which the government owns a 49 per cent stake in. High-resolution spatial data and information obtained as part of an ABC investigation sparks allegations of widespread and systemic illegal logging in protected Victorian water catchments. But only about 40 per cent of the trees taken from Victoria's native forests get turned into timber. Most of the rest is pulped for paper and cardboard — also marketed as sustainable. Despite being a for-profit company and receiving $21 million in funding from the government, VicForests reported a $4.7 million loss in its most recent annual report. At the heart of VicForests's sustainability pitch is the claim that every tree they remove is grown back. \"We grow it back\" is a motto on VicForests's website. Off the back of that, they argue the wood they sell is \"the ultimate renewable resource\". 'Regenerating' logged forests like-for-like is a legal requirement. Failing to do so can be a criminal offence under Victoria's Sustainable Forests (Timber) Act.  But the ABC can reveal alarming evidence that logged forests aren't always being grown back, undermining the industry's claim to sustainability. Sections of logged state forests have been classified as 'regenerated' despite not being so — and have been handed back to the public as little more than weed-infested fields. Others, once majestic and carbon-dense mountain ash forests, are now thickets of wattle with hardly a eucalypt in sight. Sarah Bekessy, a professor of sustainability at RMIT University says without growing back the eucalypts that were once there, the endangered animals that depend on them will suffer. \"Failing to regrow the forests and deliver those characteristics to species that depend on them will mean they'll continue to decline,\" she says. The ABC can also reveal an official government investigation concluded that forests had not been regrown as required by the law — but decided it couldn't take any action. The ABC can reveal VicForests hired a private investigator to conduct surveillance on conservationists and, more recently, conducted what some have called \"digital surveillance\" on people the agency argues are trying to \"discredit\" it. The revelations have sparked calls from conservation groups for VicForests to be shut down. And they've left architect Ian Moore unlikely to source timber from Victoria's native forests. \"I'm very concerned about what I've read,\" he says. A spokeswoman for Australian Sustainable Hardwood (ASH), which saws and sells Victorian Ash, says allegations like this \"should be substantiated before reporting otherwise risks unfair trial by media against VicForests.\" VicForests denies the allegations, with a spokesperson telling the ABC: \"VicForests regenerates all harvested forest for the future enjoyment of generations to come.\" This is the story of Victoria's disappearing forests. Stretching north east of Melbourne are the spectacular forests of Victoria, including those through the Central Highlands and Gippsland. They contain some of the world's tallest trees and most carbon-dense forests This area here, just an hour's drive from Melbourne, is the Toolangi State Forest. Just inside the state forest, VicForests logged this area known as \"Big Bull Fiddle\" back in 2010. Despite it being formally listed as 'regenerated' in 2019, which means the forest needed to be regrown like-for-like, more than a decade on the area is dominated by wattles, with barely a mountain ash in sight. Wattles will never grow to the maturity needed to support animals like possums and gliders that need tree hollows. Further east near Mount Delusion is a logged area — known as a 'coupe' — called \"Grove's Gap\".  It was logged in 2016 and determined to be properly regenerated by 2019, according to documents seen by the ABC. Yet today, it's a far cry from the forest that once existed, and is now a weed-infested grassland. Even many of the seed trees that VicForests didn't log are now dead. Less than a kilometre away is a coupe called Tom’s Track. It was logged in 2011 and classified as regenerated four years later. But a decade after logging, there is little sign of a forest here. According to Margaret Blakers, who conducted an investigation into regeneration in Victoria, VicForests' claim that forests are grown back \"like for like\" is a \"lie\". Imagery: Google/Maxar Imagery: Google/Landsat/Copernicus Margaret Blakers didn't mean to delve so deeply into VicForests' record on regeneration. She's an independent researcher and conservationist. She was a founding member of the Victorian Greens and has campaigned for years to stop native forestry. \"What I was looking for was to see what happens after a forest is logged … and I kind of stumbled on it,\" she says. She saw a reference to reports the state-owned logging company was required to produce, but she couldn't find them. So she began to demand the reports under Freedom of Information laws. As she collected them, a picture began to emerge. According to the Victorian government, between 85 and 95 per cent of the time, areas are successfully regenerated within three years of being logged. But among the documents collected by Ms Blakers were VicForests' own \"finalisation lists\" for areas logged between about 2013 and 2017. In forestry jargon, a logged area (or coupe) is \"finalised\" once it has been logged and successfully regenerated. In order to be classed as regenerated, it needs to resemble the forest that was there before. It needs to be regrown to its pre-logged state, like for like. Under the law, regeneration needs to return the \"natural floristic composition\" to the forest, including the correct mix of trees. In addition, specific numbers of those correct seedlings must be present in each hectare of land. Contrary to the official claims, those documents Ms Blakers obtained showed 30 per cent of the logged areas weren't officially regenerated within three years. Looking at particular forest types, Ms Blakers found mountain ash forests failed to regenerate within three years about 50 per cent of the time. A VicForests spokesperson said in a statement that forest regeneration \"is an extensive and carefully managed process, which generally takes around three years to complete the replanting or reseeding.\" Ms Blakers says the figures she discovered for the three-year regeneration failure rate were shocking. \"The government says no more than 15 per cent fail and need some kind of remedial treatment. We found twice that failure rate,\" Ms Blakers says. But Ms Blakers wasn't satisfied with those official figures, and believes there is more to the story. In 2017, long-time forest campaigner Ed Hill was looking at satellite imagery of Mount Delusion in Gippsland, when he noticed something unusual. \"You could see on Google Earth that there were just vast areas of what was once alpine ash forest that was failing to regenerate. It was like a moonscape,\" he recalls. So he went and visited the area and it was worse than he expected. \"In some places you could walk for 100 metres and there wouldn't be a single tree. When it was a forest, there would have been hundreds of trees in that area.\" Some of the areas, including one called \"Tom's Track,\" were logged years earlier, in 2010 and 2011. Tom's Track had been considered regenerated by 2015 and officially handed back to the public. When that happens, it is no longer considered the responsibility of VicForests. And that was what Ed Hill says bothered him the most. \"The land that VicForests is logging is public land — it belongs to everyone — and [VicForests] basically get the right to log it, and then they have to regenerate it,\" he says.  \"They're meant to put the forest back. And once that occurs, the land is handed back to the state — back to the people of Victoria.\" But without regrowing the forest, Ed says the practice is tantamount to stealing. \"They basically just robbed the landscape of the trees and then handed it back.\" Ed and his fellow campaigners put in a complaint to the Office of the Conservation Regulator (OCR) alleging the legal requirement to regrow the forest wasn't complied with. The OCR investigated, and found there was no breach of the law, saying there was \"no direct evidence … the regeneration did not comply with the [legal] requirements.\" But internal OCR documents obtained under Freedom of Information laws by Ms Blakers, did suggest the regeneration failed to comply with the law. An internal Case Decision Record says that the regeneration outcomes there \"do not meet prescriptions in the Code\" and resulted in \"large areas of fragmented habitat and canopy floristics vastly different to that prior to harvesting\". Despite that, the OCR concluded that since no harvesting operations were now occurring in those areas, they weren't able to give any orders to VicForests. Essentially, since the logging company had declared it \"finalised\", the regulator decided it had no power in relation to that coupe anymore. In a statement, the OCR told the ABC it didn't find any evidence VicForests had failed to meet its legal requirements. \"The Conservation Regulator cannot take legal action in situations where evidence is not available to substantiate offending and criminal culpability cannot be determined,\" the spokeswoman said. \"Several confounding factors such as grazing by domestic cattle and non-native deer, as well as competition from dense grass cover and blackberry may have contributed to the regeneration outcomes after coupes were finalised.\" Ed Hill says that's just ridiculous. \"It's like third world land management practices, which just shows how completely unregulated the industry is,\" he says. Partly motivated by what Ed Hill saw at Mount Delusion, and the concern that nobody was checking the state of regeneration, Margaret Blakers decided to see for herself. She and a team of volunteers identified logged areas where they suspected regeneration had failed and visited them on foot. In some cases they used a drone to inspect them. They visited more than 60 areas. According to Ms Blaker's judgement, 44 had indeed failed to adequately regenerate, largely based on the density of eucalypts present. Of those 44 coupes, all but 10 were officially listed as \"finalised\" — and so regarded by VicForests as being successfully regenerated. \"When coupes had not regenerated, the failure was obvious and often catastrophic,\" said Ms Blakers. Some areas she described as \"extensive deforestation,\" where what were once ash forests, were now \"weed infested blackberry patches\". Other areas had become dominated by shrubby natives — like wattles. Others simply didn't have adequate eucalypt density to be considered on par with the previous ecological function of the forest, according to Ms Blakers. \"They claim that they regrow forests after logging, like-for-like. That if you wait long enough you'll get back a forest that resembled what was originally there in all cases. And the reality is that is not true. In other words, the logging is built on a lie.\" A VicForests' spokesperson said in a statement: \"VicForests regenerates thousands of stems per hectare. All VicForests regeneration operations are strictly conducted in line with the Code and Management Standards and Procedures (MSPs) for timber harvesting and are subject to the oversight by an independent regulator.\" Ed Hill is a long-time opponent of native forestry. But he says this is an issue that supporters of the industry should be angry about too. \"The definition of sustainability is all about sustaining a resource. This is the opposite of that,\" he says. \"These forests could be cut again if they manage it properly. So it's not just an environmental issue — they're actually squandering a really valuable resource.\" Reporting and research:  Digital production and mapping:  Additional digital production:  Design:     "}, "/news/2021-11-30/twitter-jack-dorsey-resigns-ceo-parag-agrawal/100660338": {"description": "Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey resigns, prompting share price fall", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey has stepped down from his position, with the company's board unanimously appointing Chief Technology Officer (CTO) Parag Agrawal as his successor. Jack Dorsey will remain on Twitter's board until 2022 Shares in Twitter surged before finishing the day down 2.7 per cent In 2020, Mr Dorsey faced calls to step down from investors Mr Dorsey posted a statement on his Twitter account, in which he said, \"I want you all to know this was my decision and I own it.\" \"I'm really sad ... yet really happy,\" he continued. He will remain on the board until his term expires in 2022. Mr Agrawal has been CTO since 2017 and at Twitter since 2011. The announcement of Mr Dorsey's departure came hours after it was mooted on CNBC. Twitter shares surged nearly 10 per cent after the announcement but closed down 2.7 per cent. In early 2020, Mr Dorsey faced calls from Elliott Management Corp to step down, after the hedge fund argued that he was paying too little attention to Twitter while also running Square Inc. Mr Dorsey fended off the pressure by giving Elliott and its ally, buyout firm Silver Lake Partners, seats on Twitter's board. Just two days before news of his resignation broke, Mr Dorsey had tweeted from his personal account: \" I love twitter\" Mr Dorsey first became Twitter CEO in 2007 but left the role in 2008, before he returned to the post in 2015. In his goodbye post, he said that he has \"worked hard to ensure this company can break away from its founding and founders\" and that to focus too much on whether companies are led by their founders is \"severely limiting.\" While Twitter has high-profile users like politicians and celebrities and is a favourite of journalists, its user base lags far behind old rivals like Facebook and YouTube and newer ones like TikTok. It has just over 200 million daily active users, a common industry metric. Twitter also announced on Tuesday a new board chairman, Bret Taylor, to replace its existing chair, Patrick Pichette. Mr Pichette will remain on the board. Mr Taylor has been on Twitter's board since 2016 and is the president and COO of business software company Salesforce.  "}, "/news/2021-11-29/critical-minerals-hub-slated-for-the-nsw-central-west/100657948": {"description": "NSW poised to reap riches of 'new frontier' in mining — but no funding or timeline yet", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australia's first \"critical minerals hub\" has been announced for the New South Wales Central West, but for now the plan is a strategy with no funding or timelines attached. The government is promising to make the state a major global supplier of critical minerals and metals such as cobalt, nickel and copper with local advanced manufacturing. A large number of projects in NSW have been deemed investment-ready. There are three operating mines capable of producing critical minerals, five projects at an advanced stage of development and more than 15 exploration projects targeting critical minerals. The NSW government is describing its new strategy as \"a new frontier for the NSW mining sector\" with a strong focus on sustainable mining. The government has set out its vision to make the most of untapped rare earth mineral deposits in the Central West. The vision includes a commitment to establish Australia’s first Critical Minerals Hub in the Central West, promote exploration for critical minerals resources, activate the industry through proactive development of supply chains and attract the investment for critical minerals resources, downstream processing and recycling. Deputy Premier Paul Toole said \"the future global economy and the pathway to lower emissions will be founded on minerals that NSW is rich in, such as cobalt, rare earth elements and copper\". He said these minerals would be \"vital in enabling our vibrant growth industries like advanced manufacturing, batteries, defence and aerospace, technology-enabled primary industries and renewables\". \"This strategy has been in the making for a number of years,\" he said. \"These minerals are going to be the future with solar panels, renewables, aerospace and defence. \"They need these rare earth metals and minerals and we've got them right here. \"That's why we want to be a global supplier and lead the world. \"By having this strategy we are now creating the opportunity for investment in NSW — companies will now want to explore, extract and be involved in advanced manufacturing.\" Mr Toole promised billions of dollars would be invested in regional NSW, because, he said, \"the appeal of more cost-effective, efficient and secure supply chains will give confidence to explorers, mining companies, and investors to set up and operate in NSW\". \"We are on a very large deposit of rare earths,\" he said. Australian Strategic Materials non-executive chairman Ian Gandel, who has \"spent nearly two decades advocating for the Dubbo rare earth and minerals project\", says this is a welcome sign of the project's progress. The Dubbo Zirconium Mine project was approved in 2016 when an Environment Protection Licence was granted and work to attract investors for the $1.3 billion project has been underway since. \"There's some urgency for Australia to secure its place in the global supply chain for rare earths and critical materials, especially given our reputation for quality and reliability in other resource industries in the current limited global supply chain,\" Mr Gandel said. \"The commitment shown by the NSW government will help to address this and attract critical investment in establishing projects and production of critical metals with a global supply chain.\" Local MP Dugald Saunders said the strategy was about \"delivering economic growth, and also delivering advanced manufacturing jobs into the future\". \"There is global demand,\" he said. \"We will be at the forefront of providing what the global demand is out of areas like Dubbo and wider NSW.\""}, "/news/2021-11-29/sa-funtea-chain-goes-into-liquidation/100659854": {"description": "Fears workers will not get paid as bubble tea chain accused of wage theft enters liquidation", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The Fun Tea chain of cafes in Adelaide has gone into liquidation, in a move that workers fear could leave them thousands of dollars out of pocket.  viral on social media launched legal action The ombudsman accused the operator of underpaying more than 20 employees $186,000.  The workers allege they were paid flat rates of $10 to $18 an hour, which is less than their entitlements under the Fast Food Industry Award.  Some of the workers were visa holders, including international students, and four of the workers were aged under 21.  SA Unions has reported that since the legal action commenced, a number of workers continued to not receive wages, some for up to seven weeks.  Workers also allege that they have been paid a part-time hourly rate, despite being casual employees who are entitled to a casual loading.  SA Unions Secretary Dale Beasley said far too often in the hospitality industry workers missed out on the wages they believed they were owed when a company went into liquidation because there was not much to sell.  \"We have a situation where our laws are not strong enough,\" he said.  \"Wage thieves are able to shut the doors and walk away, leaving their victims out of pocket, high and dry, with little chance of getting what they're owed. \"For insecure workers, missing out on what they're owed could mean slipping into poverty, becoming homeless, unable to support their families — and we know that's a cycle that is difficult to break out of.\"  In April, an ombudsman audit of cafes and fast food outlets across Adelaide's Chinatown precinct found high levels of non-compliance with pay and penalty rates.  Fun Tea has been contacted for comment. "}, "/news/2021-11-29/apra-finalises-bank-capital-mortgage-business-loan-rules/100659428": {"description": "Home loan interest rates to keep favouring owner-occupiers over investors under new rules", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Home loan interest rates are likely to keep favouring owner-occupier borrowers over property investors under finalised changes to bank capital rules. Banking regulator APRA late on Monday afternoon released its new bank capital framework, which it has described as \"more risk-sensitive\". As a result, the current higher interest rates facing property investors, borrowers with small deposits or little equity, and those on interest-only loans are likely to remain, if not increase. However, because a very similar draft was flagged a year ago, it is understood APRA is not expecting big shifts in market pricing for mortgages and other loans as a result of the final changes. While the size of a loan relative to the bank's valuation of the property (loan to valuation ratio, or LVR) was previously the main measure of risk considered by the regulator, APRA will now also differentiate between owner-occupier and investor loans, as well as principal and interest versus interest-only loans, with the latter in both cases considered riskier. In the context of capital requirements, riskier loans resulting in bigger capital requirements will mean higher costs for the bank and, therefore, the borrower. Here is how it will work, in very simplified terms. Capital is the buffer banks are required to hold to absorb losses from bad loans, particularly during times of financial or economic stress. It is relatively expensive because banks have to deliver a sufficient return to the investors (shareholders and bondholders) who are putting their cash on the line in the event things go sour. Because of this, the level of capital required for a particular type of loan is a significant determinant of its cost, or the interest rate the bank will charge. APRA is slightly shifting the dial through changes to the \"risk weighting\" it applies to different forms of lending. Global regulators cast doubt on mortgage risk models that Australia's big banks use to make mega profits. The risk weighting is basically an estimate of how risky a loan is, and therefore how much it should count towards the \"risk-weighted assets\" that banks have to hold capital against. If a loan has a risk weighting of 100 per cent, its entire value is considered at risk. If it has a risk weighting of 40 per cent, the bank only has to hold capital against that at-risk portion. So, for example, if a bank was required to hold 10 per cent capital, it would have to hold $100,000 in capital against a million-dollar loan with a 100 per cent risk weight, but only $40,000 against the same-sized loan with a 40 per cent risk weight. To give a simple example from APRA's new policy, under its \"standardised\" model (used by the smaller and mid-sized banks) the risk weighting on an owner-occupier home loan that is for less than half the value of the property is 20 per cent, but it is double that (40 per cent) for mortgages with a loan-to-value (LVR) ratio between 80 and 90 per cent. So a bank would have to hold twice as much capital against the 80-90 per cent LVR loan as it does against the one below 50 per cent. As you can see from the graph, for any given LVR, investor loans and longer-term interest-only loans will have a higher risk weight than owner-occupier principal and interest mortgages. Therefore they are likely to continue having higher interest rates. The benefit may go to owner-occupiers with large deposits or lots of equity in their home, who are likely to continue seeing relatively cheaper mortgages. While the standardised risk weightings do not apply to the major banks, and some other larger institutions that use APRA-approved internal risk models, the same principles will apply. APRA figures show that the major banks, on average, are likely to see a small reduction in their risk-weighted assets under the new rules, which may mean they can slightly reduce the capital they hold. However, the regulator indicated that this is due to a fall in risk weights for commercial property and large corporate loans, while mortgages will see a slight increase in overall capital requirements. \"One of the objectives of the new framework has been to strengthen the amount of capital held by banks for residential mortgage lending, given the industry concentration in this asset class,\" noted an information paper released by the regulator. \"In APRA stress testing, mortgages are a significant driver of overall losses, and typically account for around a third of aggregate bad debts. \"Under the new framework, APRA has increased capital for residential mortgages relative to other asset classes, and better distinguished higher and lower risk lending.\" APRA also noted that risk weights for small and medium enterprises will be lowered for banks using its standardised approach, potentially facilitating slightly cheaper lending to this sector. APRA chair Wayne Byres said an unquestionably strong banking industry is central to the stability of the financial system. \"Capital is the cornerstone of the banking system's safety and stability,\" he said. \"It protects depositors during periods of stress, ensures banks can access funding, facilitates payments and helps banks to keep lending to their customers during good times and bad. \"Although Australia's banking sector is already strongly capitalised by international standards, the new capital framework will help ensure it stays that way.\""}, "/news/2021-11-29/omicron-covid-variants-worries-gold-coast-tourism-operators/100659042": {"description": "Fears Omicron will prolong the pain for Gold Coast tourism operators", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " new Omicron COVID variant Destination Gold Coast chief executive Patricia O'Callaghan said operators had their fingers crossed for a \"business as usual\" holiday season. \"The Christmas/New Year period is critical for our industry,\" she said. Gold Coast Mayor Tom Tate was concerned the border reopening might be delayed, but said he was hoping for a \"scientific\" outcome from National Cabinet. The city has been subject to strict border rules, which are set to ease on December 17, or whenever the state reaches an 80 per cent double dose vaccination rate. \"All the messaging we're hearing from the Prime Minister and Queensland government is that it's a cautious approach from our governments,\" Ms O'Callaghan said. \"At the same time, there have been no changes from a Queensland perspective and we welcome that news. \"How we react to this variant will determine what our industry looks like in moving into the future.\" Earlier today, Deputy Premier Steven Miles said \"nothing has changed at this stage\" regarding the plan to ease border restrictions next month. Yesterday Queensland Health said officials were monitoring the situation closely and that Queensland remained on track to reopen once the vaccination target was reached. Cr Tate said he was hoping for a \"clear and factual\" response from National Cabinet to the possible Omicron threat. Do the Pfizer, Moderna and AstraZeneca vaccines protect against the new variant? \"Whatever decision is made should be made based on a scientific decision, not [an] over-cautious decision [that will] hurt the livelihoods of people in Coolangatta,\" he said. \"My view is still the same — COVID will be with us and we are going to have to learn to live with it. \"As far as we are concerned, the target of vaccination, taking it all the way to 90 per cent, should be our ambition.\" suffering a billon-dollar blow in the last quarter to September Ms O'Callaghan said bookings were sitting at 70 per cent and she expected the number to increase by the day. \"We're seeing people book closer to the date of travel, we're seeing them hold on to their booking when there are changes,\" she said. Cr Tate said he was not concerned about cancelled trips to the Gold Coast. \"I think the underlying passion to come back and get back to normal life [remains], especially coming to the Gold Coast where it is [safer from COVID] than in Sydney and Melbourne,\" he said. \"I think you will see a great move of [travellers] coming to the Gold Coast.\""}, "/news/2021-11-29/schoolies-wrap-as-party-week-comes-to-an-end/100657706": {"description": "'Best' schoolies on record celebrated, despite resurgence of the mullet ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The dust has settled, the headaches have subsided, and the schoolies have left Surfers Paradise once again. Almost 16,000 teens took over the Gold Coast to celebrate the end of more than 12 years of schooling following the event's cancellation last year. \"actually the best\" Local businesses also praised the teens for \"helping [them] out\" after a tough two years for Gold Coast tourism. In a blow to their reputation, schoolies have conceded they were \"pretty chill\". bad behaviour Chair of the Schoolies Advisory Board Mark Raeburn said he was pleased with the event and the 1,000-volunteer response, despite one minor sign of the times. \"The good news is the response has gone really well and credit to the schoolies,\" he said. \"The bad news is the mullet count grows year after year, and there's nothing we can do to stop it.\" School-leaver Olivia Duncan said it was \"pretty nice\" to hear she was among the \"best behaved\" group \"in history\". \"I think in the past everyone kind of remembered schoolies as being a bit crazy,\" she said. \"It seems we were all pretty chill this year.\" Acting Chief Superintendent Rhys Wildman said \"number of factors contributed to the shift in behaviour. \"The school-leavers this year have actually been the best on record,\" he said. \"Definitely the education programs prior to schoolies were definitely having a positive impact on what we are seeing with this cohort coming through. \"I think COVID may have had some positive implications here … providing that group with a little bit more maturity in the way that they've had to deal with things. \"They've had a very disjointed last two years in their education space.\" Youth Affairs Minister Meaghan Scanlon praised schools for helping \"to make sure people are prepared, that they know what the risks are, but also know what the opportunities are\". \"That work is a testament to what we have seen,\" she said. Queensland Ambulance Service's Justin Payne said there were 60 fewer people through the Emergency Treatment Centre this year compared to 2019. \"Of the 400 people we saw, only 19 of those needed to go to hospital,\" he said. \"From a hospital avoidance strategy, the school-leavers response had a minimal impact. \"The response the paramedics had from the school-leavers was very, very positive. Everyone was quite polite and there was always a sober friend on every single instance we had in the tent.\"  Over the week, 28 schoolies were arrested for public nuisance-type offences, down from 42 in 2019 and more than 60 in the years before. Police arrested 88 toolies and recovered two screwdrivers and two knives from non-school leavers during \"wanding\" operations. \"It's a bit of a wake-up call for some of our older members of our population on the expectations of behaviour,\" he said. \"Just because you're a little bit older doesn't make you particularly smarter when it comes to choices in how you behave in a public place.\" Recent graduate Cameron said he did not see any \"dramas\" with schoolies. \"I reckon we were a good-behaved cohort,\" he said. Brisbane-based Ryvan Tingee and Xander van Wyk said there were \"too many toolies\". \"They'd just get angry for no reason,\" Mr van Wyk said. \"There were lots of drunks, just drinking too much.\" tough two years. \"This has been great for the local economy,\" she said. \"When you've got hundreds of thousands of young people coming into Surfers Paradise all spending money, no doubt buying kebabs at the end of the night, it really shows that it is a boom for the tourism sector here.\" Supervisor at a Surfers Paradise beer and burgers business Porshia Porellie said '\"hangover\" breakfasts were \"really needed\" to help prop up business. \"Schoolies have been a really good week for us,\" she said. \"Especially after the two years of COVID we really needed it. \"The borders open up on the 17th that we're really excited for, so just getting this little test run before the Christmas holidays start, it was really nice for us and it's really nice to be in a busy environment again. \"It's one of our necessaries here every year. It's one of the biggest influxes of money into Surfers Paradise each year at the end of the year and it really does help us out.\"  On behaviour, Acting Chief Superintendent Wildman said the \"bar has been set very high\" for incoming schoolies of 2022."}, "/news/2021-11-29/royal-australian-air-force-farewells-classic-hornets/100658448": {"description": "Tears and tributes flow as Classic Hornet leaves the nest", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Tears were shed and fond memories shared at the Royal Australian Air Force base at Williamtown today, as a significant contribution to aviation history was marked.  The F/A-18 Classic Hornet has been officially retired after serving the country for nearly 40 years. In that time the fleet of Hornets completed more than 400,000 flying hours and more than 1,900 missions. Hundreds of people gathered this morning to celebrate the aircraft's long list of achievements. Group Captain Jason Easthope, the air combat group's chief of staff, had the honour of flying a Hornet for the final time. \"It's an ageless aeroplane ... the performance is fantastic,\" he said. \"It was bittersweet for me ... because I'm passionate about flying and I love flying the Hornet but it was pretty clear to me today it was coming to an end. \"I was there, turning and burning, pulling eight G (-force) trying to stay conscious and had a tear in my eye. It's a pretty tough day.\" It was a display that captured the attention of around 500 guests. Defence Minister Peter Dutton was among them and paid tribute to those who had been involved in the Hornet program. \"That was a spectacular display and it showed to all Australians what incredible service the Hornets have provided to our country,\" he said. \"It's a remarkable effort by the pilots, by the crew, by the support industry and by the Royal Australia Air Force. \"It's a leading Air Force and respected right around the world.\" The first RAAF Hornets to arrive in Australia were flown from the US to Avalon, Victoria in June 1984. The A21-103 model made its first flight the following year. The Hornets were first deployed following the September 11 terrorist attacks in 2001 to protect the major US air base on the Indian Ocean island Diego Garcia, which was used to mount operations in Afghanistan. They were also deployed to the Middle East in 2003 to aid the war on terror in Iraq and most recently in 2018 for the fight against Daesh. Air Commodore Tim Alsop, commander of the air Combat Group, said tens of thousands of men and women have worked with the Hornets. \"Many have gone onto the new F-35A; some have gone onto the Super Hornet up north,\" he said. \"A number are working on the preparation of the Classic Hornet to be either displayed in museums and also for the Canadian Air Force.\" More than 20 Hornets have been sold to Canada and the US, while around eight will remain on display in Australia, including two at the Fighter World museum in Williamtown. The Hornet can fly above 50,000 feet and up to 1,915 kilometres per hour. The aircraft have been replaced by the F-35A Lightning II joint strikers. \"As of this week, we are now a fully F35 combat force,\" Air Commodore Alsop said. \"We will continue to see the F35 numbers grow so we're still taking deliveries of the aircraft from Dallas-Fort Worth. \"The most recent three only arrived about two or three weeks ago.\" Sign up here"}, "/news/2021-11-29/australia-future-fund-invest-companies-myanmar-military/100658518": {"description": "Australia's Future Fund holds just under $158 million in companies linked to Myanmar's military", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Myanmar's shadow civilian government has criticised Australia's sovereign wealth fund for investing in several companies — including weapons manufacturers — that have done business with Myanmar's military. ousted Aung San Suu Kyi and seized power in February this year Documents obtained under Freedom of Information laws by activists reveal that the Future Fund holds just under $158 million in 14 public companies with links to Myanmar's military — known as the Tatmadaw — including an arms manufacturer that has sold fighter jets and other weapons to the junta. National Unity Government (NUG) \"The military is using these arms to commit crimes against citizens — to the extent of crimes and against humanity and genocide,\" he told the ABC through a translator. \"We would like to request the Australian government and the Future Fund to stop this support — they are helping the military to survive while they commit these violent acts [towards] their own citizens.\" arrest of Australian economist Sean Turnell The FOI documents show that the Future Fund — which holds investments worth just under $200 billion — has invested around $5 million in subsidiaries of Aviation Industry Corporation of China (AVIC), which researchers say has sold short-range missiles, long-range missiles and combat aircraft to the military junta. Australia's Future Fund has also invested almost $18 million in Indian defence firm Bharat Electronics, which has sold sonar, radar and other surveillance systems to the Tatmadaw. U Tin Tun Naing said international firms supplying the military junta with either weapons — or propping-up the regime through their investments — were undermining domestic attempts to starve the regime of cash and legitimacy. \"If we can cut off international investment, the military cannot survive. That is why we are requesting international businesses, deeply from our heart, to divest and [stop] their engagement with the military,\" he said. A spokesperson for Justice For Myanmar, Yadanar Maung, also said that the Future Fund investments were \"deplorable\" and accused it of \"seeking to profit from companies arming the Myanmar military and effectively financing its campaign of terror\".  \"In the name of Australia's 'future', taxpayer funds are being invested in companies that supply the Myanmar military with fighter jets, missiles, radar and provide millions in annual revenue to war criminals,\" they said. \"It is time Australia stops profiting at the expense of the lives of Myanmar people and Myanmar's future.\" A spokesperson from the Australian Future Fund said it had built a portfolio that includes \"passive investments\".  \"In line with its mandate from government, the Future Fund has built a broadly diversified portfolio [that] includes passive investments through thousands of entities globally,\" the spokesperson said.  \"The fund has a well-established policy on environmental, social and governance matters and exclusions [that] takes account of its objectives, legislation, investment strategy, Australian law and the treaties that the Australian government has entered and ratified.\" Australia's federal government has repeatedly criticised Myanmar's military junta and urged it to free political prisoners and restore democracy, but has resisted calls from civil society groups to impose fresh sanctions on the military leadership."}, "/news/2021-11-29/regional-businesses-hoping-against-changes-to-skilled-migrants/100657976": {"description": "Businesses desperately needing skilled workers hope Omicron doesn't make things worse", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Regional areas dealing with worker shortages are hoping there will be no delays in bringing skilled migrants into Australia as concerns are raised about the new Omicron variant. allow fully vaccinated temporary migrants and international students to enter Australia from December 1 Regional businesses owners said the pandemic has made it harder to find workers, especially without being able to get skilled migrants. Laurie Whelan, owner of Sourdough Bakery and Café, said he is so short staffed that they are unable to bake bread two days a week for the first time ever. \"In 15 years in the industry this is completely unprecedented that we're not able to get the qualified and skilled staff that we need,\" he said. Fears the federal government will keep the border shut to skilled migrants has Mr Whelan worried there is no relief in sight. \"It's very deflating. We feel like we're on our last legs,\" he said. The bakery owner has gone from having around seven staff available for two baker roles to just one. \"Going into the Christmas period, with public holidays … we're going to have days where we'll just have to be closed,\" he said. including in construction which is also grappling with a shortage of timber as well Manufacturer Alpine Truss in Wangaratta has been struggling to get more staff and said it needs at least another 30 employees as it faces its busiest period in 20 years. Managing director George Prothero said getting staff is their biggest issue.  \"We're losing people every week at the moment. We've lost ten in the last two weeks to other businesses in the region,\" he said. \"People are just moving from one to another, businesses are poaching staff because we're all in the same boat.\" Mr Prothero said they were having trouble finding local people to fill positions and \"would be in all sorts of trouble\" if they could not bring in workers from overseas soon. \"Not only for my industry but every other industry in the region,\" he said. \"We're finding that people from overseas are really keen to work, they turn up.\""}, "/news/rural/2021-11-29/a-year-of-china-wine-tariffs/100657166": {"description": "China stopped buying Australian wine almost overnight. Luckily, these countries saved the industry from complete ruin", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " One year on, and China's tariffs on Australian wine imports have wiped almost a billion dollars from the trade, with the industry bracing for more pain heading into the 2022 vintage.  This time last year, The Lane Wine Company in the Adelaide Hills was exporting more than 20,000 bottles of wine a year to China. Now it doesn't export anything there.  Chief executive Jared Stringer said anti-dumping duties had gradually squeezed the life out of Australia's wine exports to China. \"All of that wine going to China had to end up somewhere, and my biggest concern was and still is that it would end up in the domestic market and thus flooding it and lowering the price,\" Mr Stringer said.  At its peak, the Chinese wine trade was worth $1.26 billion a year to Australia and made up 41 per cent of the overall value of Australian wine exports globally. In the last 12 months the trade has fallen off a cliff and is now worth just $82 million thanks to duties of between 116.2 per cent and 218.4 per cent. The premium red wines have felt the brunt of the tariffs as 96 per cent of the export to China were red wine.  The domestic market has picked up some of the homeless wine, but market diversification has been the main strategy to turn the fortunes around. The federal government has provided a $50 million support package for exports and regional wine, but the pandemic as well as tight container availability and a global shipping crisis has made developing new markets difficult.  Mr Stringer said the pandemic had supercharged sales from the direct-to-consumer market, helping reduce the shortfall.  \"We've had a more than 60 per cent increase in direct-to-consumer, which is enormous for us,\" he said.  The United Kingdom has emerged as the largest market by volume and value for Australian wine and one The Lane has targeted.  Mr Stringer said they have seen some good gains in the UK, but it is a very different market.  \"The UK is not buying the same high-level premium wines that China was buying so we're having to sell less volume at a lower price essentially to the UK,\" he said \"So, we're having to educate the UK consumers a little bit more that they can buy some premium Australian wines. But if you think about some of the discounted wine they've been buying through their big supermarkets, it is a bit of a re-education process. \"There are multiple markets, but it's tough though with COVID because you can't get overseas and you can't shake hands and introduce yourself and get them tasting your wines.\"  Wine Australia's export figures show the drop in wine sold to China has not been covered by other buyers.  Exports to new or expanding markets have only increased by 10 per cent in value to $1.99 billion and decreased by 6 per cent in volume, to 610 million litres.  Wine Australia's general manager of corporate affairs Rachel Triggs sees some promising signs, particularly in South-East Asia. \"Hong Kong for example in the last 12 months is up 120 per cent to $206 million, Singapore's up 89 per cent to $164 million,\" she said. \"South Korea has been a really strong market in the last 12 months up 84 per cent to $46 million and both Thailand and Taiwan have both experienced growth of about 50 per cent.\" Ms Triggs said it was difficult to say how much of an effect the demise of the Chinese market had on the overall bottom line for Australia's wine industry. \"At its peak, China accounted for 16 per cent of volume ... In the last 12 months we have seen volume decrease by 19 per cent, so we can't just attribute that to China,\" she said \"We know going into the 2021 vintage inventory levels were at an all-time low, so supply was an issue.\" South Australian Wine Industry Association chief executive Brian Smedley agrees the changing trading conditions as well as difficulties with shipping, the pandemic and the weather means there are significant headwinds heading into the 2022 vintage.  \"For China we know that the market has basically collapsed. So, for bottled wine it means that for the last year it's been progressively ending and for many producers they are looking for alternative varieties,\" Mr Smedley said.  \"We know for grape growers there are contracts that have been made that are now being unmade in the sense that supply intakes are being looked at ahead of vintage 2022. \"We also know that the pricing has come off for red grapes in particular, given that China was a red-grape market. \"We're looking at alternative markets, but those alternative markets will take a long time to come on and won't necessarily replace the value or the volume of China.\"  The World Trade Organization will form a panel to investigate the dumping allegations, but it will be some time before it will make any findings.  Prior to the imposition of tariffs, Australia was exporting the greatest volume of wine to China, accounting for 25 per cent of the imported wine market. However, Wine Australia figures showed wine and other alcoholic beverage consumption was already on a downward trend. Wine imports from Australia declined by 88 million litres in the 12 months to September, with only 55 million litres picked up through increased imports from other countries.  \"I think that could be attributed to the fact that people are actually drinking more Chinese wine; they do have a significant amount of vineyards in China,\" Ms Triggs said.  The main countries to capitalise on Australia's gap in the market are Chile and Spain, whose wine imports come at a much lower average price.  "}, "/news/2021-11-29/lnp-net-zero-policy-queensland-coal-country-federal-election/100647958": {"description": "The reactions to LNP's embrace of net zero in Queensland's coal country", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " As a coal miner, Labor member and unionist, you'd be excused for thinking Russell Robertson would be a shoo-in for a seat in the middle of coal country. However, in 2019, he not only failed to win the then-marginal seat of Capricornia, he also experienced a huge swing against the ALP. \"I think we got caught in two lands,\" Mr Robertson told ABC's 7.30. The LNP focused on Labor's ambivalence about Adani's proposed Carmichael coal mine, and branded the party as anti-coal. \"It was just a tidal wave — and parties like the Greens were completely unhelpful,\" Mr Robertson said. The coal miner has again been preselected to run against Nationals MP Michelle Landry. But this time the electoral dynamics have been changed by the Prime Minister Scott Morrison's embrace of a net zero emissions plan. And it's left local LNP members wary.  \"I'm not a great believer in net zero policy per se,\" explained Colin Boyce, a Queensland state MP who has been preselected to run for the Nationals in the neighbouring coal seat of Flynn. \"We need coal-fired power stations for some time yet before, and if, we transition to an alternative energy source.\" Mr Robertson is unsure about how the electorate will react to the federal government's pivot on accepting a net zero emissions target. \"It's a real mixed message that I'm seeing out there at the moment,\" he told 7.30.  \"The LNP candidates and members, they've got to turn themselves inside out now, and that's basically entertaining to watch.\" Since announcing the federal government's net zero plan in late October, the Prime Minister has argued it will only have a minimal impact on coal workers. As world leaders continue to debate the best course of action on climate change, local councils in regional areas are already on their way to net zero. \"They'll continue to be working in that industry for decades to come, because there will be a transition that will occur over a long period of time,\" Mr Morrison told a media conference on November 15. Mr Boyce rejects even talk of gradual change to the industry. \"I don't believe it,\" Mr Boyce said. \"We do not have an alternative energy source that provides reliable base load power at this point in time.\" The federal government's own modelling for net zero predicts a 50 per cent drop in the value of coal production by 2050. Mr Boyce doesn't accept that either. \"There is scope there for the modelling to be wrong,\" he said. Central Queensland's sensitivity to any talk of phasing-out the coal industry was demonstrated in the 2019 federal election, when a pro-coal rally confronted a convoy led by environmentalist Bob Brown in the town of Clermont. \"They rallied pretty quick,\" explained one of the rally organisers and former local publican, Kel Appleton. \"Unless they can offer them a better outcome, you will see it again, because that's their livelihood.\" Mr Appleton believes Mr Morrison has made a mistake by embracing net zero, but is comforted by dissident voices in the LNP, such as Queensland Senator Matt Canavan. \"I don't think Scott Morrison did himself any favours, [but] I do like what he's done as far as he's promised nothing will happen to the coal industry,\" he said.  Independent modelling of a net zero emissions policy undertaken by Victoria University predicts coal industry employment in Australia will drop by nearly 30 per cent between now and 2050.  However, the modelling still predicts more than 37,000 people will be employed in the industry by mid-century. \"Who's using this coal? Well, it won't be Australia,\" economic modeller Professor Philip Adams said. \"It will be overseas electricity groups, particularly in China and India.\" The modelling suggests the shift to net zero will create winners and losers across Australia. Regions such as Central Queensland, which rely on coal and broadacre agriculture, are the most vulnerable to decarbonisation. \"Moving to net zero emissions means structural change,\" Professor Adams said. \"Now is the time to start planning for 30 years into the future. Not 2040 or 2045, it's 2021 where these transition plans need to be thought of.\" As part of that transition, the Queensland government has selected the Rockhampton region as a renewable energy zone, with five major wind and solar projects in the pipeline. \"We have 300 days of sunshine, and also from a wind point of view, [based on] wind modelling … we're led to believe our region is very attractive for that,\" Advance Rockhampton's Greg Bowden said. Access to the power grid is also an important factor, although Mr Bowden concedes there is some nervousness in the community. \"Not everyone loves change and not everyone embraces new technologies along the way,\" he said. \"And I think, from a jobs point of view, if you're staring down the barrel of your job being gone in two, five, 20 years' time, I suppose I'd be a bit nervous as well.\" So how does this affect Labor's pitch for Central Queensland's coal seats in the upcoming federal election? \"I think you try to be honest,\" Mr Robertson said. Unlike the LNP's Mr Boyce, who argues climate change has been \"exaggerated\", the Labor candidate admits he's worried about global warming. But, he adds, the industry has been \"a convenient target\". \"If the load was shared throughout the community, they'd be less-focused on [the coal industry], and that is how you can do more if you're so inclined.\" Watch this story tonight on 7.30 on ABC TV and "}, "/news/2021-11-29/katy-perry-tradmark-court-case-begins-in-sydney/100658126": {"description": "Katy Perry used her 'financial might' to try and shut down Australian fashion designer's business, court told", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " American singer Katy Perry attempted to \"snuff out\" the budding business of an Australian fashion designer using her \"financial might\" during a brewing trademark battle, a Sydney court has heard.  Katie Jane Taylor has sold clothes under her maiden name, Katie Perry, since November 2006 and had a trademark registered in September 2008. In a case being heard before the Federal Court, she alleges the singer infringed her trademark from at least 2013 by selling products with a mark \"substantially identical to, or deceptively similar to\" her own. The singer, whose real name is Katheryn Elizabeth Hudson, subsequently launched a cross claim to have Ms Taylor's trademark cancelled. Hudson adopted the stage name Katy Perry, as a combination of her own first name and mother's maiden name, in 2004. Barrister Christian Dimitriadis SC, for Ms Taylor, told the court the designer began her business \"well before\" she was aware of the singer, which meant she was the rightful owner of the trademark. He described Perry's \"flagrant\" infringement of Ms Taylor's rights and outlined how she had resisted \"heavy-handed threats\" back in 2009. \"Ms Hudson and her advisors attempted to use their greater sophistication and financial might to snuff out Ms Taylor's nascent business,\" he told the court. But Ms Taylor \"stood up for her rights\", Mr Dimitriadis said. She first became aware of the singer in July 2008 when she heard the song I Kissed A Girl on the radio, the court heard, but had already begun selling her products at Sydney markets. The year before, she registered her business name and a domain name. Letters from Perry's lawyers in 2009 came as \"a significant shock\" to the designer. The court heard Ms Taylor went public with the legal battle that year, sparking an email from Perry's manager stating it had been \"blown way out of proportion\". Mr Dimitriadis said Perry was not only a famous musician but a \"savvy businessperson who actively exerts control over her business empire\". She sold Katy Perry-branded clothing and related goods during her Australian concerts in 2014 and 2018, along with lines which appeared in Target and Myer. Mr Dimitriadis referred to a 2009 email Perry sent to her manager advising him she \"wanted a message put out\" and \"not to soften it up or apologise\", also referring to Ms Taylor in \"what we would submit was plainly a very derogatory way\". In defence documents, Perry's legal team denies infringing the designer's trademark because she used her own name in good faith. The singer had \"substantial prior media publicity in Australia\" from about June 2008, the documents say. Matthew Darke SC, for Perry, told the court the singer was using her name for entertainment purposes in Australia from November 2007.  It was an \"entirely natural and orthodox transition\" for pop stars to begin selling branded clothing, he said, which Perry began doing with an online store in September 2008. That store went live before Ms Taylor applied to register her trademark, Mr Darke said, by which point the singer had a \"very substantial reputation, including in Australia\". He also rejected the assertions of \"heavy handedness\" but said to the extent conduct of that kind occurred, it took place before Perry appreciated the nature of Ms Taylor's business. The cross claim was purely defensive because the circumstances meant there was \"no choice\" but to request removal of the Katie Perry mark, Mr Darke said. Ms Taylor, whose case is funded by litigation funder LCM, is expected to give evidence on Tuesday. While Perry is not expected to make an appearance, her manager Steven Jensen will be a witness."}, "/news/2021-11-29/ballarat-african-community-concerns/100657694": {"description": "'Tough time' for African community as new COVID rules restrict travel", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Members of Victoria's African community say new travel restrictions imposed by the state government are \"disheartening,\" as authorities work to learn more about a new COVID-19 variant. Investigations are underway in NSW into three possible cases of the Omicron variant It has led to a series of precautionary changes in travel requirements by the Victorian state government. Anyone who has visited South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini, Malawi or the Seychelles in the past 14 days must undergo two weeks of hotel quarantine. Forty airline passengers are in isolation in Victoria. Victoria's Chief Health Officer Brett Sutton said the restrictions will allow more time for health authorities to better prepare for and understand the variant. The president of the Ballarat African Association, Dr Michael Akindeju said it's come at a tough time for the African community, with international travel restrictions only lifting at the start of November. \"(There are a) number of people who would have taken that opportunity to quickly travel and expected now they're fully vaccinated they can travel in and out,\" Dr Akindeju said. \"For parents or grandparents who think they can meet their grandchildren, for various other reasons people have may come into Australia. The emergence of a new COVID-19 variant has scientists, health officials and the public concerned, and the World Health Organization monitoring the situation closely.  \"With the new development, it is disheartening that they may not be able to make that trip.\" However, \"on balance\" Dr Akinjedu said he understands the government's approach and that it was \"right.\" He said he is concerned by the rate the new variant appears to be spreading. \"The inequalities across the world, and that's applicable to African countries... the vaccination rates are quite low,\" he said. \"We do hope that things will turn around... and of course that vaccinations will be made [more] available to African nations.\" Federation University immunologist Dr Stuart Berzins told ABC Ballarat breakfast radio, while the new variant appears to spread quickly - it could be due to several factors. \"We don't know whether these people have been vaccinated or not, in Africa the vaccination rate is about 10 per cent for the continent – and I believe it’s higher for south Africa itself,\" Dr Berzins said. The emergence of a new variant of COVID-19 shows Africa needs greater access to vaccines, and there is more we can be doing at home too, experts say. \"We really don't whether it makes people sicker, we don't know how it affects people who have been vaccinated.\" \"There isn't enough to panic about it or think that it's going to be like another Delta wave.\" Dr Berzins said it's likely immunologists and authorities will have a better idea of the variant very quickly. \"We will probably know more in the next week or so,\" Dr Berzins said. \"The danger is that countries in south Africa that are now seeing travel from their areas completely shut down, that's basically going to kill their tourism industries. \"There is a real fear at the moment that countries in Africa will be really reticent to put their hand up and say hey, we've got this as well, because of the effect it'll have on their economy.\""}, "/news/2021-11-29/markets-wall-street-dow-jones-asx/100657818": {"description": "New COVID-19 variant concerns spark volatility on global markets; ASX falls", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The Australian share market has closed in the red, driven by investors worried about the new COVID-19 variant Omicron. The local share market came off the lows of the session, however, as US stock market futures rose.  The ASX 200 ended down by half a per cent at 7,239.7 points. Earlier, the benchmark index had fallen around 1.4 per cent, to a near two-month low, adding to the 1.7 per cent decline on Friday. Australian shares pared back their losses as futures markets signalled a potential bounce back when Wall Street reopens for trade. S&P 500 futures were 0.7 per cent higher at 4:45pm AEDT. Despite that, stocks around the region remained under pressure, with falls in Tokyo (-1.7pc), Hong Kong (-1.2pc), Seoul (-1pc), Shanghai  (-0.5pc) and New Zealand (-0.8pc). On the ASX, all sectors ended the session in the red, with the exception of materials. Mining stocks rose strongly, including BHP (+1.4pc), Rio Tinto (+1pc) and Fortescue (+2.4pc). At some point on Friday afternoon, news flashed up on trading terminals across the globe indicating the new strain of COVID-19 found in South Africa  — and markets reacted, writes David Taylor. The biggest gainers among the top 200 included Hub24 (+4.8pc), Bapcor (+4.6pc) and Domino's Pizza (+4.1pc). The largest falls were for shopping centre owners Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield (-6.2pc) and Vicinity Centres (-4.8pc), and EML Payments (-5.5pc). Travel stocks closed lower but recovered some ground from initial heavy falls. Flight Centre (-0.9pc), Qantas (-2pc), Corporate Travel Management (-2.4pc), Webjet (-2.8pc), Helloworld (-4.1pc) and Sydney Airport (-2pc) all fell. Shares in IAG lost 1.1 per cent, as global litigation firm Quinn Emanuel launched a class action against the insurer on behalf of shareholders, alleging IAG failed to update the wording of its business interruption policies in the lead up to the pandemic. QBE Insurance (-2.7pc) and Suncorp (-1.4pc) shares dropped more sharply. On commodities markets, West Texas crude was up 4.5 per cent, to $US71.20 a barrel, while the global benchmark Brent crude price rose 3.8 per cent, to $US75.46, but local energy stocks remained in the red. The spot gold price was 0.2 per cent higher, at $US1,795 an ounce. US markets tumbled on Friday, with the Dow Jones losing 2.5 per cent. The Nasdaq and S&P 500 fell around 2.2 per cent. The VIX volatility index spiked to its highest level since February, rising 10 points. \"Rising concerns about the new COVID-19 variant, Omicron, led investors to flee to safer haven assets on Friday,\" St George economists wrote. \"Investors are concerned the new variant will dent the global growth outlook.\" RBC Capital Markets head of strategy Su-Lin Ong expects the uncertainty around the new variant to increase volatility on the local share market heading into the end of the year. \"Given the Delta experience, we would expect policy makers to assume the worst, move quickly, and take an overly cautious approach, which appears to be emerging,\" Ms Ong said. \"Until there is greater clarity, markets will be nervous.\""}, "/news/2021-11-29/government-changing-regulations-to-combat-scam-text-messages/100657702": {"description": "Government and telcos announce crackdown on scam text messages", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Telecommunications companies will soon be able to block scam text messages from being sent in the first place, thanks to regulatory changes by the government.  An increase in malicious text messages in recent months has been described as a \"tsunami\", with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) receiving tens of thousands of reports of scams. Australians have lost more than $87 million to scams this year. Having stepped in to block more than 200 million scam phone calls pretending to be from government agencies, the federal government is now paving the way to make it easier for telcos to block malicious text messages at their source. \"[In] a further step to deal with the problem of scam texts … what we again want to do is make sure the telcos have the power to use their technologies to identify and block these texts before customers even realise they're there,\" Communications Minister Paul Fletcher said. \"The fact is we're dealing with organised criminals, mostly located overseas, who are pumping out calls and texts. \"They're using technology. We need to use technology to combat what they're doing.\" ACCC warns of 'genius' text message scams. Telstra CEO Andy Penn said that technology included algorithms and artificial intelligence. \"We're already blocking hundreds of thousands of [text messages],\" he said. \"What this initiative does is it enables us to get a much richer set of data — much better access to the data we need to use with our algorithms and artificial intelligence engines — to better identify those [messages] which are malicious. \"That's the name of the game.\" Many of the scam texts Australians have been receiving claim to be unopened voicemail notifications, with a link to download the \"voicemail\". Mr Penn said the sheer volume of messages that were sent around the country meant detecting scams could only be done using technology. \"As you can imagine, there are billions, if not trillions, of transactions and [text messages] and calls going across telecommunications networks every year and what we have to do is try and sift through that and identify those that are malicious and block them at their source,\" he said. \"That can't be done manually. We need to use computer technology, we need to use artificial intelligence.\" Labor recently called on telcos, as well as banks and retailers"}, "/news/2021-11-29/new-zealand-politician-cycles-to-hospital-to-give-birth/100657688": {"description": "NZ politician cycles to hospital, in labour, to give birth … again", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " New Zealand MP Julie Anne Genter got on her bicycle early on Sunday and headed to the hospital. She was already in labour and she gave birth an hour later. \"Big news!\" the Greens politician posted on her Facebook. \"At 3.04am this morning we welcomed the newest member of our family. \"I genuinely wasn't planning to cycle in labour, but it did end up happening. \"My contractions weren't that bad when we left at 2am to go to the hospital — though they were 2-3 minutes apart and picking up in intensity by the time we arrived 10 minutes later,\" Ms Genter wrote. New Zealand's Minister for Women, Julie Anne Genter, reveals she rode her bike to Auckland City Hospital to give birth because there \"wasn't enough room in the car\". \"Amazingly now we have a healthy, happy little one sleeping, as is her dad,\" said Ms Genter. A dual citizen, Ms Genter was born in the US state of Minnesota and before moving to New Zealand in 2006. Ms Genter — her party's spokesperson for transport issues and whose Facebook profile includes \"I love my bicycle\" — also biked to the hospital in 2018 for a previous birth.  At the time, she said she rode to Auckland City Hospital to give birth to her son because there \"wasn't enough room in the car\". Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern famously took maternity leave while in office and brought her three-month old to a United Nations meeting because she was still breastfeeding.  "}, "/news/2021-11-29/social-housing-future-fund-to-fix-australias-housing-crisis/100651342": {"description": "There's a simple, budget-neutral way to improve housing affordability, Grattan says", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australia's housing crisis for low-income families has become acute, but it could be partly fixed with a unique solution, a think tank says. The federal government should establish a \"social housing future fund\" to generate the income needed to construct thousands of social housing dwellings every year, the Grattan Institute said. If the fund was created with an endowment of $20 billion, it could soon be funding the construction of 3,000 social housing units every year, or double that number if its payments were matched by state government funding. Australia has failed to build enough social housing in recent decades. Brendan Coates, the Grattan Institute's director of economic policy, said the facts were alarming. He said social housing — where rent was typically capped at 25 per cent of a tenant's income —could make a huge difference to the lives of vulnerable Australians. But Australia's stock of social housing, which is currently about 430,000 dwellings, had barely grown in 20 years, even though the country's population had increased dramatically over the same period (by 33 per cent), he said. In 1991, about 6 per cent of housing in Australia was social housing, but now it is less than 4 per cent. According to Mr Coates, most tenants stay in social housing for more than five years. That means there is little \"flow\" of available social housing stock for people whose lives take a turn for the worse, and more vulnerable Australians are being forced into the private rental market where they have to pay more of their weekly income on housing. \"With fewer low-income Australians owning their home or living in social housing, their housing costs are rising,\" Mr Coates said. Low-income is defined as the poorest 40 per cent by equivalised household disposable income. \"The median low-income social renter pays 24 per cent of their income on rent, compared with 37 per cent for the typical low-income private renter,\" he said. \"The bottom 20 per cent of households by income now spend 29 per cent of their income on housing on average, up from 22 per cent in 1995.\" Mr Coates said the federal government should establish a social housing future fund. A place to call home: it's time for a Social Housing Future Fund He said the fund could make regular capital grants to state governments and community housing providers every year. If the fund started with an endowment of $20 billion, and had an investment mandate to target real (after-inflation) returns of 4 to 5 per cent, it could deliver 3,000 social housing units a year. That number assumes capital grants of $300,000 per dwelling to cover the up-front subsidy gap for social housing. House price falls are all but baked in as interest rates start rising over the next couple of years, writes Michael Janda. Mr Coates said such a fund would boost social housing with little or no hit to the federal government's budget bottom line. \"Since the initial endowment is an investment, it wouldn't appear on the underlying budget balance,\" he said. \"The federal government already manages $247.8 billion in assets across six future funds to address long-term problems ranging from covering federal public servants' superannuation entitlements to funding medical research.\" He said capital grants from the fund could be allocated by the National Housing Finance and Investment Corporation. The grants could be awarded via competitive tender, with requirements for dwelling size and location. If the $20 billion fund generated after-inflation returns of 4 to 5 per cent a year, it could generate an annual dividend averaging $900 million. If the fund was up and running by 2022-23, it could build 24,000 social housing dwellings by 2030, and 54,000 dwellings by 2040. If future governments chose to top up the fund endowment, it could fund even more social housing. Mr Coates said the federal government had been \"clear\" it regarded social housing as state governments' responsibility. However, he said the history of Australia's federation showed large social programs, from Medicare to the post-WWII expansion of social housing, only succeeded with federal support. He said this reflected the reality that Australia's federal government had more powerful revenue-raising abilities: For every $5 in taxes levied in Australia every year, the federal government collected four and the states only one. Nonetheless, he said, the federal government's frustration with state inaction on social housing was partly justified. He said in the five years leading into the pandemic, the total stock of social housing increased by just 1,600 homes. Therefore, Mr Coates said, the federal government should require state governments to match federal contributions to new social housing as a condition of any grants being allocated by the fund. \"If matched state funding was forthcoming, the future fund could provide 6,000 social homes a year — enough to stabilise the social housing share of the total housing stock,\" he said. \"It would double the total social housing build to 48,000 new homes by 2030, and 108,000 by 2040.\" However, Mr Coates said a social housing future fund alone would not solve the housing crisis for low-income Australians. He said even with an extra 108,000 social housing dwellings by 2040, more than two-thirds of low-income Australians would  For that reason, he said the federal government ought to also boost Commonwealth rent assistance by \"at least\" 40 per cent and index the payment to changes in rents. That would immediately reduce financial stress for some of Australia's most vulnerable families. \"This would be a fairer and more cost-effective way to reduce financial stress and poverty among poorer renters,\" he said. \"It's well targeted. About 80 per cent of Rent Assistance goes to the poorest fifth of households.\" On Friday, a new report from the Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute (AHURI) found between 1.5 million and 2 million Australian renters aged 15 and over were potentially one life shock away from homelessness. Estimating the population at-risk of homelessness in small areas, The AHURI said the lack of affordable rental housing for low-income households in Australia — be it private rental or social housing — was amplifying various forms of disadvantage. \"There is a need for greater provision of rental housing that is specifically targeted to those on low incomes and/or those at risk of homelessness,\" the paper concluded."}, "/news/2021-11-29/tas-family-despair-as-builder-woes-put-house-dream-in-limbo/100653544": {"description": "'Like the wild west': No protections as homes unfinished after builder goes under", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Kate and Rod Iskander's building site with views across Hobart's River Derwent is littered with bricks and hardening bags of cement after their builder stopped work on their home two months ago. They say they are financially out of pocket hundreds of thousands of dollars and are faced with the prospect they may not be able to finish their home. \"I haven't slept, I cry all the time … the kids are devastated,\" Kate Iskander said. Their builder, Inside Out Construction — owned by Corey Wills — has gone into administration. \"We've sort of been scrambling ourselves trying to find out what our rights are calling CBOS [Consumer Building and Occupational Services], Master Builders Association, getting legal advice,\" Ms Iskander said. \"But there's really not much we can do.\" The Iskanders have described their financial loss as \"a scar on our financial lives going forward forever\". \"My estimation and based on the couple of quotes we've got [to complete the house] is we're nearly $250,000 out,\" Rod Iskander said. \"We might have to walk away from this and not be able to have our home … yeah, it's devastating,\" Kate Iskander said. A couple's dream to build a home for their blended family on a waterfront block has been shattered, with experts advising the only way to fix the building's defects is to demolish it and rebuild. The couple embarked on the build for a four-bedroom, two-bathroom home in August this year. The couple said they paid their builder prior to the completion of the base stage. \"We stupidly put the progress claim through because [the builder was] telling us there was material shortages,\" Mr Iskander said. \"We did that, you trust the builder … and then literally the work stopped pretty much after that.\" The couple have been left with the base for a driveway into the garage and some steel posts on site. The Iskanders moved to Tasmania from New South Wales and were shocked to discover that there was no insurance covering their losses. In all states, bar Tasmania, there is mandatory building warranty insurance. It covers a range of different issues — mainly builders who die, lose their licence or become insolvent. \"I guess the whole process has just taught us that there's absolutely nothing for you as a consumer,\" Mr Iskander said. \"You sign a contract, you're on your own. \"If the builder dies or disappears that's it, it's on you, there's no insurance, there's nothing. \"I am absolutely shocked that that is the case.\" The couple are calling for the Tasmanian government to agree to an inquiry to look at how consumer protections can be strengthened. \"It's quite embarrassing to be here and go through this, put ourselves out there like this. But we're here to try and prevent this from happening to other people,\" he said. \"Something has to be done, it's the wild west out here, it's just crazy.\" Maddy and Victoria Stansfield signed a contract with the same builder. \"It's been a very stressful time, but we're really grateful to have the support of our family. It's had a big emotional toll on both of us,\" Victoria Stansfield said. The sisters have dreamed of becoming home owners since high school and have been putting money aside. \"We have been working since high school so we have been saving up since then.\" \"When the government grants came out we thought that was a great time with the help from them to start to look into the housing market,\" Victoria said. Building a home is a huge investment. So when it goes wrong, it can be devastating. Here's what to do to make sure it goes to plan, and the steps you can take when it's all too late. The sisters could not afford to buy on their own so pooled their money to invest in building a house to share. \"We wanted our own spaces in the house … so we had it three bedrooms, two living and we're keen to share it with our family and friends,\" Maddy said. Work started on their block in July, but then there was no progress for months. \"We heard nothing pretty much until we questioned what was happening and we've been going around in circles with meetings pretty much ever since,\" Maddy said. The sisters face the prospect of losing close to $75,000, with the builder in administration. \"That's really one of our main concerns, we've put our life savings into building this home,\" Victoria said. Alistair Dennis said he feels like one of the lucky ones — he and his business partner were also clients of Inside Out Construction. Their two-unit development on Hobart's eastern shore is almost complete. \"I just feel sorry for people … we know of people who have half-built houses and framework,\" he said. Nevertheless, Mr Dennis said their build had taken a toll. It started in 2020 and he said it had been a long and difficult journey to get the building company to finish the job. \"It's just been one debacle after another. My business partner, who has got the other unit, his mental health is not good because of it.\" Mr Dennis is also calling for better consumer protections in Tasmania. \"There needs to be some sort of insurance scheme. If it can operate in other states, why can't it operate in Tasmania?\" Home owners are not the only ones to have been let down by Inside Out Construction. The ABC has spoken to one of the company's former employees who said he is owed about $44,000 in wages plus about $7,000 in superannuation. He said there were about 20 employees who stopped working for the company last month. Fair Entitlements Guarantee scheme Mr Wills has not responded to requests for comment. The Master Builders Association in Tasmania is helping 23 clients of Inside Out Construction find new builders. \"We provide contracts and part of that service is that we do provide support and advisory services to builders and their clients,\" said the association's executive director, Matthew Pollock. He said under the Residential Construction Contracts Act, a builder \"cannot claim for work that hasn't been done\". \"The tragedy in this whole circumstance is there are no winners when a builder or a business owner goes out of business,\" Mr Pollock said. \"It's an extremely challenging environment for builders at the moment … cashflows have been affected substantially across the sector due to COVID-induced supply chain issues. This unfortunately is a result of that. \"Inside Out is not the only building business that we've seen go under in the last few weeks.\" Building surveyor Gabriel Barnes said his work at times brings him in contact with people who have been let down by their builder. \"I find I am a social worker and marriage consultant when I am dealing with some of these people,\" he said. \"They are at their wit's-end, they have spent all their money on the biggest investment of their life and they don't know where to turn and there doesn't seem to be any assistance for them out there other to than go to court.\" He believes an insurance scheme would help both consumers and builders. \"Builders used to be restricted in the number of houses they could take on at any one time by the number of assets that they had,\" he said. \"You'd get a builder that may have a ute and tools, he might be able to have one house on the go at a time until he builds up his assets. \"But now, that insurance doesn't exist … we have builders out there who are basically taking on 20 homes at a time and all they've got is their ute and tools behind them.\" Mr Barnes said insurance was even more important with the state and federal government offering first home builders grants. \"We've had builders who have done nothing but sign up clients en masse since December last year and then have been pouring concrete slabs ever since,\" he said. \"As material prices have been going up by 15 to 20 per cent minimum, those contacts that they signed 12 to 18 months ago are now looking very shaky in some cases. It's bringing builders undone.\" Some in the building industry argue that the insurance was too expensive and too few claims were made. \"I am not suggesting the insurance was the rolled gold standard by any means, and yes, it was expensive,\" Mr Barnes said. \"But to go from something to nothing. \"I tell you what, it's more expensive to go through the Supreme Court trying to get blood out of a stone,\" he said. \"I just wish government would stop telling us how good their system is when clearly it's not and start listening to those of us who have been in this industry and dealing with the ramifications of it.\" Attorney-General Elise Archer said in a statement it was the \"government's intention to investigate the possibility of reintroducing a model for home warranty insurance in Tasmania\". Labor's Jen Butler said she would continue to fight for a government inquiry into building in Tasmania, despite it being rejected by the state government last month. \"At the moment in Tasmania you've got more protection when you buy a toaster than what you do when you build a home,\" she said. Ms Butler referred to the long campaign that resulted in the banking royal commission becoming a reality. \"Sometimes it takes many times for a government to agree to a parliamentary inquiry, for instance for the banking royal commission that took 18 times of tabling a notice of motion and asking a government to actually agree to an inquiry,\" she said. \"We will keep going, we won't stop until the government agrees.\" Set the ABC News website or the app to  Here's a taste of the latest stories from Tasmania:"}, "/news/2021-11-29/housing-affordability-disability-challenge-first-home-buyer/100639948": {"description": "Housing affordability is a national crisis, but for one group of young people it can be life changing", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " particularly in the past year young people and first home buyers For young people with a disability, however, purchasing a home can be an even greater financial challenge, partly because the hidden costs of having a disability can make it much more difficult to save a deposit and pay off a mortgage.  While having access to secure housing is important for all Australians, for people with disabilities it can significantly increase opportunities for community participation and quality of life.  Alecia Rathbone, the general manager of Summer Foundation's Housing Hub, says having a secure home can help people with a disability be more independent. \"An accessible home increases your ability to be part of your community — to work, to study, to socialise with family and friends — while reducing your need for person-to-person support and the costs associated with that,\" she says.  vulnerable to abuse damages their health 4.4 million people living in Australia Find out how you can get involved this year on the IDPwD website. study published last year six times greater than annual incomes According to Dr Michael Palmer, an economist at the University of Western Australia, people with disabilities are more likely to have health conditions that require specialised health care, rehabilitation and drugs. tens of thousands of dollars And while some government support is available in Australia, it often doesn't cover all the costs associated with disability.  \"Many people with disability also need to access therapies and supports which are not fully costed under either the NDIS or schemes such as the Medicare Better Access schemes,\" says Smith-Merry.  For me, these figures ring true. I have a musculoskeletal disorder which, according to the ABS, is the most common type of disability reported. While I am grateful to receive subsidised access to medication and several sessions of physiotherapy and exercise physiology each year through Medicare, I generally use these services on a weekly basis, so the vast majority is not covered.  The cost of these services is one of my most significant expenses, accounting for 30-50 per cent of my weekly budget, often ahead of other \"essentials\" such as rent or food. Although I've had to grieve my past self, my disability has freed me from the weight of my own expectations about who I should be — and helped me become braver than I ever imagined. With house prices rapidly rising, I worry about how my inability to save and pay a mortgage now could affect my longer-term health and financial security. I also worry about what would happen if I found myself unable to work in the future: How would I cover my rent? These costs can hit families particularly hard. Linda*, who requested her real name not be used to protect her family's privacy, says she struggles every day with the cost of essential services for her children, who have neurological disabilities and specific language disorder. The speech and occupational therapy they need costs more than $500 each month — and they are not eligible for any support under the NDIS, as they've been classified as having only \"mild\" disabilities.  Then there's the additional burden of getting to and from their appointments — an hour away from where Linda lives in regional NSW.  Although it has been recommended that Linda's children attend therapy weekly, she says the rising costs of living mean her family just \"can't afford\" it. high priority for federal However, in developing new initiatives, experts warn policy makers must consider ways to improve housing affordability for everyone — including people with disabilities.  twice as likely to be unemployed \"Our current strategy is not working very well because it looks to employers for action, but whether they act [to hire people with disabilities] or not is up to them,\" Smith-Merry says. \"With high levels of stigma towards some people with disability, to really raise the level of disability employment the government may need to look towards things such as a Disability Job Guarantee and other forms of job creation programs.\" Increasing the accessibility and range of subsidised disability services under schemes like the NDIS and Medicare would also likely reduce the cost of living with disability. As the average house price jumps by more than 20 per cent — the biggest increase in more than 30 years — first home buyers say they're struggling to remain positive.  \"Without strong financial support by governments, households with members with disabilities will continue to experience a lower standard of living compared to otherwise similar households without disability,\" says Michael Palmer. a program that exists in Canada But while getting together a deposit can be \"tricky\", Smith-Merry says it's also important that people have \"enough money\" to pay their mortgage. And for too many, this will unfortunately remain unachievable until the prohibitive costs associated with having a disability are addressed. \"Stable housing is essential for physical security and for having a stable base so that people with disabilities can access the supports that they need to live the life that they want,\" she says. The ABC is partnering with "}, "/news/2021-11-28/sa-torrens-to-darlington-project-design-released/100657244": {"description": "Plans unveiled for largest road infrastructure project in SA's history", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The South Australian Government has released the final design of the state's biggest infrastructure project for community feedback. The plans show the northern section of the Torrens to Darlington road project, from the River Torrens to Anzac Highway, for the first time. Premier Steven Marshall said it was \"the toughest component of this overall project\". \"It was left to last but it didn't bother us because we're now getting on with delivering a fantastic completion to the north-south corridor project,\" he said. The plans include an elevated roadway north from Ashwin Parade to protect the Brickworks heritage site and a tunnel entrance at the current Torrensville Bowling Club. The eight-year-old Thebarton Community Centre will be demolished to build the entrance to a new tunnel, but the government said much of the area's heritage would be preserved. \"We get to keep the Thebarton Theatre, the Hindmarsh cemetery, the Brickworks and the Queen of Angels church,\" Mr Marshall said. The Warriappendi School at Marleston would be among the properties to be acquired to make way for the final section of the upgrade. Transport Minister Corey Wingard said the government was working to relocate the school before the end of 2024. The government said the project would create 4,900 jobs during the peak of construction, which would begin in 2023 and end in 2030. It said 393 properties would be acquired for the hybrid tunnel and lowered motorway plan — fewer than other proposals for South Road — and that residents were notified as the design for each section was finalised. \"So we did do it stage-by-stage to make sure we were letting people know as soon as possible when we had certainty about what was happening with their properties,\" Mr Wingard said. But some residents, businesses and community groups said it had been hard to get information about the project and the new plans had left them disappointed. Torrensville's Bowling Club, which opened just two years ago, was initially told they would only lose part of their greens and clubhouse. But the new design will force the club to relocate. \"We've had to really dig in and ask questions but they would turn around say, 'oh, we'll let you know eventually',\" club president Dean James said. \"We didn't have the answers … and as far the government, well, unfortunately, I think they've let us down.\" The opposition accused the government of being secretive about its plans to acquire properties. \"This is a good project but the government are stuffing it up,\" Shadow Transport Minister and West Torrens MLA Tom Koutsantonis said. \"The government is creating resentment for a project almost everyone supports.\" Construction will start on the northern section of the road in 2026, with the southern section beginning in 2023. The 78-kilometre North-South Corridor, which will create a direct route from Gawler to Old Noarlunga, is expected to be completed in 2030."}, "/news/2021-11-28/community-rallies-against-woodside-scarborough-project/100656126": {"description": "'Our pyramids of Egypt': Scores rally amid fears ancient rock art under threat from LNG project", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Traditional owners in the Pilbara have raised concerns a $16.5 billion liquefied natural gas (LNG) project could damage the pristine environment. More than 50 people gathered at a community rally in Karratha on Saturday to voice their opposition to Woodside's Scarborough project, which is set to be one of the biggest oil and gas developments undertaken in Australia. Ngarluma woman Camelia Samson said she did not believe the community had been properly briefed on the Scarborough project and its potential effect on Murujuga's environment. \"We heard about this project that's going to be happening here on our country and the Burrup, which is worrying to us,\" she said. \"It holds the most rock art in the world. \"This is our pyramids of Egypt, right here in the Burrup, and it's been there for years and years.\" Last week Woodside and BHP announced they had signed off on the final investment decision. The project, off the coast of Dampier, would include a floating production unit, 13 wells to be drilled over the life of the project and a 430-kilometre pipeline to transport the gas back to shore. The construction of an onshore LNG processing facility is scheduled to commence in 2022.  environmental approval one million petroglyphs The petroglyphs depict the traditional owners' ancient culture, their songlines and history. could lead to the art fading Ngarluma woman Josie Alec, who spoke at the rally, has spent the last 10 years creating a database for bush medicine in the Pilbara. She said she had seen a dramatic change in the plants at Murujuga. \"What the heck is [the Scarborough project] going to do to the plants, the animals? [Industry] is actually wrecking the place as it is,\" Ms Alec said. \"It's a pristine part of the country and it is hands down one of the biggest creation places in the history. \"It's not very well documented and I suppose that's why people are really ignorant to it, but I think the matter of the fact is it is so sacred.\" Ms Alec said it was her people's duty to protect Murujuga. \"Why aren't we putting resources and energy and money into actually doing something good and sustainable for Mother Earth?\" \"We're fighting for our hearts and we're fighting for your hearts.\" Murujuga Aboriginal Corporation (MAC) says it does not have a role in approving projects within the Burrup Strategic Industrial Area. \"MAC takes seriously its responsibility to protect and preserve the cultural heritage of Murujuga,\" a spokesperson said. \"We will continue to work with industry and government to ensure that no development taking place on Murujuga will impact its significant heritage values, and we will hold all stakeholders to account for any impact they have on cultural heritage values across Murujuga country.\" MAC said there was no scientific evidence that emissions were impacting the ancient rock art in Murujuga, but a monitoring program was underway. \"If research finds that emissions do have an impact on the state of preservation of rock art, then MAC will expect the state and commonwealth government to adjust any existing approvals to ensure the protection of cultural values at Murujuga,\" the spokesperson said. Woodside has been contacted for comment."}, "/news/rural/2021-11-28/carbon-reforestation-to-cost-farmers-15pc-of-profits/100653992": {"description": "How much would it cost to reforest Australian farmland for carbon credits?", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Offsetting agricultural emissions through reforestation would cost 15-per-cent of farm profits, new research suggests. In research published this week, University of Western Australia professor Ross Kingwell studied the obstacles and effectiveness of reforesting Western Australian farmland. He found that offsetting the entire sector's carbon emissions would cut farm profits by an average of 15-per-cent and require between 8 and 11-per-cent of farmland to be forested. \"Of course, that varies,\" he said. \"For a livestock business it's much more difficult to offset those emissions because livestock produce a lot more.\" Unlike previous studies, Professor Kingwell accounted for regional communities' opposition to reforestation in his estimates of the cost and distribution of land needed to achieve carbon neutrality. \"Switching land away from farming into storing carbon tends to be opposed,\" he said. \"There is likely to be a limit on how much land can be transferred [from any one shire or locality].\" For that reason, Professor Kingwell proposed reforestation would be most effective if undertaken across a wide area of the grain-growing region, away from the most productive or expensive areas. \"What you're after is land that is as cheap as possible, but it also needs to be of reasonable quality so carbon could be stored in vegetation,\" he said. Many WA farmers have been soured on reforestation after years of watching mismanaged plantation projects go to waste. \"The amount of energy to fix all the schemes that came up before … it was a huge amount of effort,\" Western Australian farmer Michael Swain said. \"$600, $700, probably $1,000 of energy a hectare was spent clearing trees [in Cranbrook],\" he said. a carbon credit scheme for reforestation projects on Australian farmland A resurgence in blue gum plantations in WA's south, after an implosion of investments in the GFC, is generating hundreds of jobs and millions of export dollars. \"We only have to look at recent crop prices to see how profitable agriculture can be,\" Professor Kingwell said. \"The carbon price at the moment makes it a poor investment but in a few years time, if the carbon price rises you might get competition.\" Carbon credits are not the only benefit that comes with biodiverse reforestation of farmland. \"Those benefits include improved water catchments, shade for animals, introducing wildlife corridors,\" Professor Kingwell said. \"But the issue is: who should be paying for those benefits? \"If those are social benefits and are paid for, that facilitates farmers and other investors making a farmland switch into biodiverse plantings.\" Energy giant Woodside has bought more than 10,000 ha of WA farmland for reforestation to help offset its own emissions since 2019, and reportedly plans to double its holdings in 2022. Emissions Reduction Fund (ERF) was the only government incentive pilot scheme The program is now closed and, like the ERF, it required reforested land to be maintained for at least 25 years. After extensive research, Professor Kingwell has concluded that reforestation alone is not the most cost-effective path to decarbonising Australian agriculture. \"There are sequestration opportunities in pastoral regions, which are much more cost-effective than switching productive ag land into trees,\" he said. \"I suspect in the next two decades the main focus is not going to be on abating emissions, but on reducing them directly. \"That may involve greenhouse gas-reducing compounds in feed [and] technologies that produce fewer emissions.\" He also noted that farmland in much of the eastern states' agricultural regions was more expensive than in WA, meaning reforestation projects there may be even more commercially disadvantaged. \"Whatever the activity that generates emissions, there needs to be innovative ways of reducing those emissions,\" he said. Agricultural scientists have done a great job of increasing crop yields and making animals more efficient, but we're yet to tackle the issue of making sure agricultural production is still profitable while being able to reduce its emissions.\""}, "/news/rural/2021-11-28/collie-griffin-coal-mine-asic-probe/100653228": {"description": "Besieged Indian-owned coal mine hit by further charges as corporate cop widens case", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Australia's corporate watchdog appears to have widened a legal case against an Indian-owned coal mine described as being \"in its death throes\" amid losses totalling more than $1 billion. It is understood the Australian Securities and Investments Commission is pursuing action against Griffin Coal over an alleged failure by the embattled miner to have a resident local director. Filings lodged with the regulator show Griffin's sole director is Raj Kumar Roy, whose address is listed as Ghaziabad, a city in the province of Uttar Pradesh in India. ASIC had charged Griffin over a failure to lodge audited financial accounts for the 2019 and 2020 financial years adds to the mounting pressure on Griffin While ASIC declined to comment on the matter, a corporate litigation specialist said the watchdog took a dim view of corporate offending where it could be deemed a \"pattern of behaviour\". Cinzia Donald, a partner at Perth-based law firm Lavan, said the resident director provisions were in place to ensure companies were accountable for their actions. Ms Donald said the provisions were designed so \"a creditor or an investor can bring proceedings and hold (directors) to account where they've breached certain obligations in Australia\". She also said ASIC had used failures similar to those alleged against Griffin to take \"incredibly dramatic\" action. \"ASIC has in the past applied to wind up companies or at least applied for a provisional liquidator to be put in control of a company where they've investigated and found multiple contraventions of the Act,\" Ms Donald said. \"There are cases that have relied on this very provision, where they've failed to have a (director) residing in Australia. \"Often that coupled with other concerning contraventions such as a failure to lodge audited accounts … ASIC certainly has taken serious measures.\" Ms Donald said the failure by a company to have a resident director was not overly serious in itself, attracting a maximum penalty of about $4000. However, she said such an oversight – especially when combined with other breaches of the law – could often be a sign of bigger problems inside a company. These included a \"casual\" attitude towards the conduct of its business. More pointedly, she said they could sometimes raise questions about the solvency of a firm and whether it needed to be wound up to protect creditors and suppliers. \"The courts view that kind of conduct with great concern,\" she said. \"It may indicate, depending on the facts of each case, that the company is being carried on in a casual manner without regard to the legal requirements of running a company. \"As a result, often the courts have no confidence the company will be a run in a proper manner. \"And then that puts at risk key stakeholders, be it investors in the company, or contractors or parties entering into agreements with that company.\" The development is the latest twist in the Griffin saga. Griffin lost a major court battle with its former mine manager, Carna Group, and was ordered to pay more than $5 million in damages In a further blow, the judge presiding over the case this week ordered Griffin to pay almost $1.5 million extra in interest and costs on top of the damages claim. Griffin is facing a damaging legal row with its biggest customer, the Japanese-owned Bluewaters power station Amid the courtroom drama, Griffin has also been hit by a series of rolling stoppages from workers claiming they are fed up with the company's performance. Meanwhile, it is believed the WA government's mine safety regulator – the Department of Mines, Industry Regulation and Safety – has stepped up its oversight at Griffin following a number of incidents in recent times. Griffin was contacted for comment. State Liberal MP Steve Thomas said the mounting problems suggested Griffin was \"in its death throes\" and it was untenable for the company to sustain its losses, which had amounted to more than $1 billion in a decade. “This is an indication of a company in its death throes and unfortunately the South West is going to have to deal with that,\" Dr Thomas said."}, "/news/2021-11-28/gambling-company-entain-fined-for-bonus-bet-breach-neds/100655456": {"description": "'Extremely serious breach': Online betting firm fined for luring new customers with $1,000 bonus", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " One of the world's largest gambling companies has been fined for an \"extremely serious breach\" after it was caught luring new customers with bonus cash offers worth as much as $1,000. Entain Group — which owns dozens of international gambling brands including Ladbrokes, Sportingbet and Neds — holds a sports bookmaker's licence in the Northern Territory. Under the NT's Code of Practice for Responsible Service of Online Gambling, companies are forbidden from offering credit, vouchers, or rewards to incentivise people to open new accounts. But the NT Racing Commission, which regulates the industry, has found Entain violated its licence by giving punters QR codes that activated \"bonus cash\" offers when they signed up to new accounts on the Neds website. \"The commission considers the offering of incentives to non-existing customers to open a betting account is an extremely serious breach of the 2019 code,\" it stated in a decision published this week. An investigation into the company's actions was launched after a commission member witnessed a conversation between a Neds representative and a racegoer at Darwin's Fannie Bay racecourse on July 31. \"The allegations were that during the course of the conversation the [representative] stated that bonuses were available to that individual, or any others who opened a Neds account using the QR code on his business card,\" the commission said. The commission member obtained the same business card and after scanning the QR code and opening a new account, they were offered three bonus cash options, ranging from $150 to $250. But a list of more than a dozen punters who signed up to the deal that day showed one received a bonus of $1,000 after depositing the same amount in their new account, while another received $400. Entain confirmed two business development managers representing Neds were at the racecourse, but both denied that bonus bets were offered to non-existing customers. Instead, the pair claimed they were offering matched deposits to existing customers, which is allowed. Despite their denials, Entain told the commission it had terminated the services of the pair for going against their training regarding sign-up inducements. Entain argued that their termination should be the end of the matter. But the commission said Entain, which had provided the businesses cards to the Neds representatives,  was at fault. \"The commission is of the view that these business cards have been issued by Entain to Neds [representatives] for the main purpose of inducing non-existing customers to open an account on the promise of a bonus cash offer. \"There seems to be no other plausible reason to include a QR code which automatically provides bonus cash offers upon a new account be opened.\" The commission noted Entain, which was previously called GVC, had been fined in 2019 after its brand Ladbrokes was found to have handed out 400 \"cash in cards\" worth $20 each to potential new customers. Despite the previous breach, it determined not to suspend or cancel Entain's current licence, and instead issued it with the same maximum fine of $26,690. However, the commission warned Entain that it may take more substantial action if further breaches occur. \"Should Entain, or any of its related businesses, breach [the] Code again in the future, the Commission will consider carefully whether other disciplinary options … should be imposed.\""}, "/news/2021-11-28/bobby-pate-kombi-coffee-van-business-with-a-smile/100604100": {"description": "Bobby is extremely proud of his 'stunning' coffee van — and his family feel the same about him", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Bobby Pate wiggles his eyebrows comically as he hangs his head out of the passenger window of a newly purchased Kombi van, parked on the front lawn of his family's Clayfield home in northern Brisbane. It's a quirky talent that never fails to trigger a smile on the face of whoever he's with. The aqua kombi, converted into a coffee van, is Bobby's next big adventure. \"Come on! Let's see my van. Looks stunning, hey?\" he calls to his sister Molly and her boyfriend Xavier Cooke. Bobby is giving a guided tour of the vintage van. Over the coming months, with his family's help, it will become Bobby's business venture. There are plans to sell coffee and sometimes flowers from Stradbroke Island to the Scenic Rim. According to his parents, Tracy and Stephen, Bobby has come a long way since he was born with Down syndrome and serious health problems 20 years ago. \"He's a real survivor — he came into the world with quite a few complications,\" Mrs Pate said. \"He had a hole in the heart and pretty much spent the first six months of his life in hospital and quite a bit of time in intensive care. \"When you reflect to when Bobby was born, it was a time that was stressful. \"We had a lot of concerns around his health and just imagining what sort of a future he had.\" While there have been challenges, two years after finishing high school, Bobby is thriving. As well as the coffee van, he works behind the counter at Brisbane's Centenary Pool, where he is known among colleagues and customers for his work ethic and humour. Centenary Pool manager Logan McGuire said Bobby had been \"growing constantly\". \"To begin with we educated him in how to make coffee and greet customers, and we're starting to expand his skill set,\" Mr McGuire said. \"He's also pretty good dancer — he'll make a coffee and then give a wink or a smile to the customer and put on a bit of a show. \"It's really good to have Bobby behind the counter with us.\" At the pool, Bobby works alongside Kate Montefia and Izzy Hansen, who have shown him the ropes and become firm friends. The young women have created a workbook for him and write a list of the jobs he needs to do each shift. On the front, they have painted a picture of all three of them. \"This is Kate – I call her tall girl. This is me and this is Izzy – I call her small girl,\" Bobby said, pointing at the painting. Bobby is also a swimmer and competes in pool and open water events, and has also started branching out into triathlons. \"It makes me fit and strong and healthy,\" Bobby said. He mostly trains at Brisbane's Valley Pool with friend and coach Cameron Preval – whom Bobby affectionately calls \"Big Boy Cam\". \"Bobby is one of the most competitive people I know,\" Mr Preval said. \"He always loves winning whether it's against family members, mates or anyone he comes across. \"We are looking to get him in the best position come national championships and look to get him to the INAS Global Games.\" Bobby is good at many things, but perhaps his greatest talent is an innate ability to bring people together. \"It makes me happy seeing people,\" Bobby said. \"I like giving them the high-five. I'm a people person.\" His parents said he had always been this way. Mrs Pate remembers how Bobby loved interaction with other people. \"We'd be at the beach and he'd say, 'Would you like to come over for a wine tonight?' to people he may not have known that well,\" she said. \"I'll often hear that people have seen him … dancing while waiting for his bus. \"I don't think he realises the effect that he has on other people but it's just his energy and his natural joy that he has for life.\" Bobby is at the centre of a supportive and committed family. \"Bobby is the great connector in our family. Not that we're all shy, reserved types but Bobby stands out as the person who makes connections,\" Mr Pate said. \"I get called Bobby's dad — that's how I'm known — because his personality carries a lot further and has a lot more repercussions in the broader community than I have.\" We offer tailored front pages for local audiences in each state and territory. Find out how to opt in for more Queensland news. His mum is the organiser, guiding her son with snippets of advice in a firm, but gentle way. \"Yes, OK Mum, thank you,\" Bobby said with mock sarcasm, the glint in his eye typical of any young man weary of mum's instruction. \"He's always keen to give anything a go and he is just an absolute joy to have in our life,\" Mrs Pate said. \"He's taken us on a path that perhaps we wouldn't have been on originally, but he's definitely enriched our lives.\" Mr Pate, a leading Brisbane landscape architect, grasps Bobby in a playful headlock which becomes a hug. \"Over the last year or two since COVID, Bobby decided to change his name in my phone and call himself 'Mr Indo' – being short for Mr Independent,\" Mr Pate says. \"It was quite a marvel — just coming from school and all of the structure, and finding this new-found freedom and calling himself Mr Indo.\" Older sister Molly and younger brother Jack, both university students, provide both encouragement and banter. Find out how you can get involved this year on the IDPwD website. Molly cranks up the volume of Fleetwood Mac's song Dream. Bobby starts singing along as he grooves around the Kombi, stepping up his disco moves when ABBA's Dancing Queen starts playing. \"He has his own vision now and his own goals,\" Mrs Pate said. \"We don't quite know what's ahead of us,\" Mr Pate adds, \"but we know there's going to be some fun along the way.\" ABC is partnering with "}, "/news/2021-11-27/matt-doran-issues-on-air-apology-to-adele/100655940": {"description": "'The bulk of this savaging, I deserve': Reporter issues on-air apology for botched Adele interview", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " An Australian TV reporter who was widely criticised for flying to the UK to interview singer Adele without listening to her new album has issued an on-air apology, admitting he made a \"terrible mistake\". Seven Network's Matt Doran said the email he had been sent which contained a link to a pre-release copy of the album was \"the most important email that I've missed in my life\". Sony reportedly refused to release the footage of the interview — which had been arranged as part of a deal between the record company and Channel Seven — after Doran said he had not listened to the album, 30, which has since gone to number 1 in the UK. In his monologue at the end of Seven's Weekend Sunrise program on Saturday, Doran said the event had precipitated \"a torrent of abuse and mockery\". \"If I'm being honest with you, the bulk of this savaging, I deserve and I totally own,\" he said. He said having the opportunity to interview the Grammy award-winner was \"an unspeakable privilege\" and one of the highlights of his career. Doran said \"at least half\" the interview was on the new music but that it would have been \"reductive\" to describe the album as \"simply being about divorce\". He apologised to Adele, saying he would \"never have knowingly disrespected\" her by deliberately not listening to the album. \"I also apologise to Adele's Australian fans, and to you, our viewers.\" Doran is no relation to the ABC reporter of the same name, who tweeted \"go easy on me\" — the name of a track on the new album — when news of the failed interview became public."}, "/news/2021-11-27/port-fairy-rental-crisis-post-pandemic/100638956": {"description": "What happens when a town runs out of rentals and prices go through the roof? ", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Business is booming across regional Victoria as the state emerges from its second lockdown, and so it seems are rental prices.  According to the latest rental market information from property data company PropTrack, the median rental price across regional Victoria has gone up as much as 10 per cent in the last 12 months.  The weekly price for a rental property in the Bendigo region has jumped by 11.43 per cent, the largest jump in Victoria, while prices in the Hume and North West regions jumped by more than 8 per cent respectively. During the same time, the average rent dropped by 3.33 per cent in Melbourne's Inner-East and stayed relatively stable in Melbourne's CBD.    But such figures pale in comparison to what seems to be happening in the seaside hamlet of Port Fairy in south-west Victoria.  Port Fairy is a quaint, seaside town around three-and-a-half hours' drive west of Melbourne. It's long been a popular holiday town in the south-west, with the prevalence of local holiday-makers from the wool-rich western district at one time giving the town the nickname \"Hamilton South\". However those looking to edge into the local market of late have received something of a rude awakening.  Over the past 12 months, demand for rentals in Port Fairy has jumped by 77 per cent, according to PropTrack. During the same period of time, the number of available rentals has halved in the Moyne Shire, and rental prices skyrocketed to the point where there were just five properties deemed \"affordable\" by the Victorian housing department.  The median weekly rent in regional Victoria is  $360 per week, a figure that's increased nearly 10 per cent over the past 12 months. However in Port Fairy, it's a very different story. \"Talking to my Port Fairy colleagues, they're seeing increases go from $500 per week to $600 per week,\" said real estate agent Daniel Roberts.  \"We're seeing there around that 10 to 20 per cent increase.\" Mr Roberts said the rental market in neighbouring Warrnambool is booming as well, prompting concerns for those on lower incomes in the region.  \"Right now it [the market] is the worst I've ever seen it,\" Mr Roberts said.  \"There's a lot of concerns out there for homelessness and that sort of stuff that the government needs to look at providing [for].\" That fear is echoed by the Council for Homeless Persons (CHP). According to CHP, the end of COVID-19 disaster payments this month will force thousands of people onto JobSeeker and increase the risk of homelessness in 70 per cent of Victorian suburbs. CHP chief executive Jenny Smith said the disparity between rental prices and income support meant some people were spending more than two-thirds of their income on rent.   \"It is simply impossible for people to afford rent and food when their income support payment is so inadequate that two-thirds goes on rent,\" Ms Smith said. \"It doesn't matter if you live in Wodonga or Williamstown, if you're a Victorian relying on JobSeeker to be able to pay the rent, then you're going to struggle,\" she said. The CHP is advocating for permanent supportive housing programs to be set-up for adults experiencing chronic homelessness and an increased focus on social housing.   Plans are underway in Port Fairy to address its lack of social housing, with one investor taking plans to the local council to unlock a new parcel of land on the town's eastern border.  The Moyne Shire Council has put those plans to the state government, and sought the planning amendments required to green light the project.  It is understood the new estate, if approved, will open up 75 vacant housing  blocks and include 10 smaller properties for social housing.  And with demand increasing across the south-west, it is expected any new developments or land will be snapped up fast.  \"People are starting to realise how beautiful Warrnambool and Port Fairy are,\" Mr Roberts said.  \"If you look at Geelong and Ballarat, they've seen substantial increases … probably six or seven years ago that Warrnambool didn't get, and all of a sudden we're catching up.\""}, "/news/2021-11-27/queensland-mining-towns-face-enormous-covid-risk/100635396": {"description": "Queensland mining towns at 'enormous' risk due to low COVID vaccination rates", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Queensland's mining belt remains one of the worst regions in the state for vaccination rates less than a month before the borders reopen to COVID-19 hotspots.  The local government areas of Isaac, Central Highlands and Banana, home to some of the largest mining communities in the state, are all below 80 per cent first dose and 63 per cent double dose. In the Isaac region alone, which includes the communities of Moranbah, Clermont, Dysart, Middlemount and Coppabella, 37 per cent of residents are not vaccinated at all, making it one of the worst in Australia. Eighty per cent of the Isaac region's workforce is employed in mining, so there's a lot at stake. Infectious disease epidemiologist at Griffith University Paul Van Buynder says there is an \"enormous\" risk of outbreaks in mining communities. \"At a remote mine site, the chances are that this is going to cease production at some stage because of the COVID outbreak,\" Professor Van Buynder said. \"We've seen from overseas that we need to get people triple vaccinated to really protect them strongly, and yet, we've got places in Queensland that haven't had any vaccine at all to a significant extent.\" Isaac Mayor Anne Baker admits she's \"worried about the whole impact\" on the region when the border wall comes down when the state average vaccination rate hits 80 per cent, expected between December 6 to 12. \"This region has not seen a lockdown since April 2020. We have not seen or lived through any community transmission,\" Cr Baker said. \"We are moving into a space that there is no negotiation on the lifting of the border … we need to live with COVID. \"We must be prepared and protected for that.\" The neighbouring shire of Central Highlands, which includes Emerald and Blackwater has about a quarter of the population unvaccinated with Banana Shire, which covers Moura and Theodore sitting at 23.4 per cent with no vaccination. speaking out Cr Baker said her council had taken a pro-choice stance, including on vaccinations, and that it had been \"extremely disappointing\" to witness misinformation spreading in the community. Ian Macfarlane, the chief executive of the Queensland Resources Council (QRC), agreed. \"Unfortunately, there's a lot of misinformation, particularly up in in the central Queensland area, and a lot of rubbish, quite frankly, that's being propagated on the internet that's created a hesitancy,\" Mr Macfarlane said. \"If you're not vaccinated, then you will catch the virus and you will get sick and you may die. \"They are the facts and the facts are that the immunisation program is easily the best protection by a long way.\" Vanguard Health is contracted by the Mackay Hospital and Health Service to deliver vaccines to the Isaac region. Clinical operations manager Sue Farrell admitted there had not been a \"great uptake\", but more people were coming forward since the state government announced unvaccinated Queenslanders would soon be banned from a raft of venues, including pubs, clubs, restaurants, cinemas and theme parks. \"Some people are a bit grumbly… but I think they do understand the importance of having this vaccine because this virus is very infectious,\" Ms Farrell said. There is no blanket vaccine mandate for Queensland mine sites, however, BHP has introduced mandates for its workers nationwide. Ian Macfarlane said the QRC was working with the Queensland government for clarity around mine outbreak guidelines, but the industry had been preparing for it for almost two years. The QRC has been running a media campaign urging workers and their families to get vaccinated, while some mining companies are incentivising vaccination with gift vouchers. \"We have put in place extra protocols where there are very tight management systems around people with health checks, there will be rapid testing available,\" Mr Macfarlane said. \"I think the industry is as ready as it can be, but the only thing that we can do more of is to get more people vaccinated.\" Have you seen your regional community change because of what people are sharing online? The ABC's Country Social project wants to hear from you Mr Macfarlane said FIFO workers from south-east Queensland had higher rates of vaccination compared to drive-in drive-out (DIDO) workers. Professor Van Buynder said the widespread travel of people between mining communities and areas in south-east Queensland, as well as low vaccination rates would increase the risk to the sector. \"Shared accommodation is particularly risky …  if you're in shared accommodation everybody else is going to get it (COVID-19) as well,\" Professor Van Buynder said. He noted that many mining communities are near Indigenous communities, which also have very low rates of vaccination. The agricultural regions of Charters Towers, Mareeba and North Burnett, and the Indigenous communities of Yarrabah and Cherbourg are also recording first dose vaccination rates below 80 per cent. There is no official data collected on a region-by-region basis on the underlying reasons behind low vaccination rates. The University of Melbourne's Professor Anthony Scott is studying vaccine hesitancy at a state level. He said people in New South Wales and Victoria, who've had more exposure to the virus, are more likely to be vaccinated, and that mandates have had a positive influence. \"Queensland, particularly in regional areas, people are pretty resilient and they kind of take care of themselves … so their contact with health services is often less than people in cities,\" Professor Scott said. \"That influences their propensity to go and get vaccinated because they're not usually at the doctors anyway. \"Our research has also shown that those people who are more dissatisfied with government policies, both state and federal around COVID are less likely to get vaccinated.\" vaccine mandate Moranbah Restaurant owner Forrest Egan said it had been a challenge to get enough staff, even without the new rule. \"I'm trying not to lose too much sleep over it. I'll just close up and move on with my life,\" he said. Mr Egan said 75 per cent of his workforce had not received a COVID-19 vaccine. \"I'll have to see what happens, whether they lift the mandate, whether we'll be able to continue trading within the hospitality area,\" he said. \"Apart from that, I'll just go and get a day job somewhere.\" Mr Egan said he was frustrated the goalposts for businesses to operate during the COVID-19 pandemic had changed continuously over the past 18 months."}, "/news/2021-11-27/government-pays-three-capes-walk-marketing/100654838": {"description": "Company running iconic Tasmanian walk bills taxpayers for marketing", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " A commercial walking company in Tasmania has received hundreds of thousands of dollars from the state government for marketing costs associated with an exclusive private walk, the Three Capes Track, which it operates in southern Tasmania.  Information obtained by the ABC through a right to information request shows the Tasmanian Walking Company has invoiced the government for just over $300,000 for marketing costs since 2019. It was paid $126,000 for marketing activities carried out last year, when the tourist industry saw a significant downturn due to border closures.  The Tasmanian Walking Company is the only commercial business licensed to operate guided tours through the Three Capes Track.  Signed in 2016, the lease and licence agreement between the company and the state government said the company could charge the government for \"marketing costs reasonably and properly incurred by the operator\". A marketing program is agreed on each year by the company and the Minister for Parks. It can include things such as event management, signage, television commercials and hosting journalists, travel writers and social media commentators.  Concept examples of billboards and signage in the marketing plans show advertising that includes the Tasmanian Walking Company logo, but no government branding. The company said the agreement requires the actual adverts to be co-branded. Invoices sent to the government include charges for flower arrangements and live music at the launch of the company's Three Capes Lodge Walk.  Also included are Tasmanian Walking Company \"brand positioning and development\", and charges for \"various jobs\".  The individual amounts paid for these itemised charges have been redacted.  A spokesperson for the Tasmanian Walking Company said their agreement with the government allows them to \"claim back a portion of fees that have been paid\".  \"All costs are directly associated with fees already paid, with no government funding provided,\" they said in a statement. The company pays $50,000 or 5 per cent of its profits, whichever is greater, for the lease and licence to operate.  It charges between $1,795 and $3,395 for the walk, or walkers can go independently, staying in public huts, for around $500.  The agreement with the government states the company cannot charge more for marketing costs than it has paid for its lease and licence, but can charge up to that amount.  This would mean it could recover the costs paid to the government for park fees. The spokesperson said the company had delivered millions of dollars into the Tasmanian economy through tourism and employment.  \"Tasmanian Walking Company has contributed 2.5 times what we have claimed in Park fees,\" the spokesperson said.  \"This collaborative approach to promoting Three Capes can be attributed to delivering more than double the projected numbers.\" Greens leader Cassy O'Connor has called the agreement \"disgusting\". \"Not only does Tas Walking Company get extraordinarily low-cost access to one of the most iconic coastlines in the country, they slug the public purse for their promotions and marketing,\" she said.  \"Wilderness lovers have watched the Liberals give away free real estate in national parks to developers, and now they're giving them public money.\" Other bushwalking companies contacted by the ABC said they did not have similar arrangements in place with the government.  One tour operator said they were gutted to hear about the agreement.  Tasmanian Expeditions marketing manager Brad Atwal said his company had not been offered marketing support on any of its range of Tasmanian adventure holidays and the company was unaware of the arrangement between the Tasmanian Walking Company and the state government. \"Both Tasmanian Expeditions and Australian Walking Holidays have invested heavily in promoting our Tasmanian product for the last year, to attract walkers to Tasmania and we would have welcomed assistance from the Tasmanian government,\" Mt Atwal said. \"With border restrictions forcing us to cancel the majority of our Tasmanian trips in the last 12 months, it has been a very challenging time and we would definitely have applied for assistance if it was available as I'm sure others in the industry would have also.\" A spokesperson for the Department of Primary Industries, Parks, Water and Environment said the government entered a marketing partnership with the company to maximise the brand and economic benefits, and the company's offerings were not in competition with theirs.  The agreement lasts for 10 years, or until 15,000 walkers have been through, whichever comes first.  \"Through this partnership approach, the PWS branding is included in all promotional material, events and advertising and this promotion results in visitors spending additional nights on the Tasman Peninsula or other parts of the State,\" the spokesperson said.  The government did not answer questions about whether similar arrangements were in place for any other operators.' Meanwhile, the Tasmanian Walking Company said the agreement took several factors into account, including the amount it had invested in infrastructure and the uncertainty of return.  \"The performance-based arrangement provided no commercial advantage to Tasmanian Walking Company who have made large investments in the park where competing operators have not,\" the spokesperson said.  Billed as an \"iconic walk\", Three Capes is one of Tasmania's premier attractions. It was developed by the state and federal governments at a cost of $33 million.  The walk — which takes three to four days on the Tasman Peninsula — was completed in 2019 and, pre-COVID, had an estimated economic impact of $19 million a year.  There is currently a proposal to build the next iconic walk at the Tyndall Ranges in Tasmania's west, which has drawn fire from environmental groups.  Set the ABC News website or the app to  Here's a taste of the latest stories from Tasmania:"}, "/news/2021-11-27/inside-sydney-strata-nightmare/100651690": {"description": "'People were screaming': Police called to wild Sydney strata meeting in cracking apartment tower", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " It's the stuff of Sydney strata nightmares: a cracking building, an expensive repair bill and an owners' meeting that got so heated the police turned up. The drama started in the basement of the Vicinity apartment towers in Canterbury earlier this month, when owners couldn't agree over who should be put in charge of managing the affairs of the troubled apartment block. The 10-storey development, which was finished in 2017 and includes 254 units, came under government scrutiny last month.  Inspectors were sent in after an engineer's report, commissioned by owners, questioned the building's structural safety and documented cracks in the concrete slabs used to support the apartment towers. Within minutes of the extraordinary general meeting being opened on November 11, tempers flared.  One concerned attendee called police, who warned they would shut the meeting down \"if this thing does get out of hand\". Video from the same meeting shows owners shouting and jeering at each other before officers arrived. The ABC understands animosity about the repairs, as well as a divide between investors and owner-occupiers has created the rift. \"People were screaming, I thought a brawl was about to break out,\" Leith Dawes, a former strata committee chair, said. The development's management is in turmoil, with two strata committees effectively claiming to run the building after the chaotic meeting. Many of the strata disagreements stem from differences between the building's owner-occupiers and owner-investors. Owners living in the building say they want defects properly fixed, but some investors — who rent their apartments to tenants — are baulking at the cost of special levies and an ongoing court case against the developer, Toplace, fearing it will harm their prospects of selling.  The growing angst was accelerated after government inspectors last month examined the basement to see if the building would need to be evacuated.  Inspectors ultimately decided people could stay, for now, as \"any potential collapse associated with the observed cracking would further manifest over time\". A government report provided to owners recommended cracks at major structural locations be monitored. Toplace has previously told the ABC the building is structurally sound and the engineer's report questioning its safety is based on incorrect assumptions and is invalid. It did little to quell concern among those that live at the complex, who pointed to a string of separate issues with those involved in the construction.  The certifier who signed off on the initial construction certificate has since had their accreditation cancelled over concerns about their work on another project.  The engineer who checked the structural adequacy of Vicinity is under investigation by Engineers Australia, however that probe is yet to be concluded.  The engineer denies any wrongdoing and has told the ABC that an investigation does not in and of itself equate to negligence or guilt.  The concerns about the certifier and engineer relate to other projects. Meanwhile, Toplace — the developer behind the project — has been ordered by NSW Fair Trading to fix potential defects at two other sites. Resident Patrick Quintal, who bought his apartment in May this year, is nervous. \"You can probably appreciate my dismay,\" the 27-year-old said. \"I've got defects on my balcony that just make me sad. \"You move in and find most people are owner-investors and only care about getting their rent money. \"When you tell them about the issues, they lose their minds about having to pay for common property fixes.\" He's among several owner-occupiers, including another man, Michael Jones, that dispute the selection of a new strata committee, which took place at the tumultuous November 11 meeting. Mr Jones claims the committee — a group of apartment owners that oversee the management of a building — is stacked with investors who are unsympathetic to their cause.  About 20 owner-occupiers have lodged legal action in the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal, hoping to oust their current strata manager and limit his access to owners' corporation funds, and a separate application to remove the property manager.  Hearings are likely to begin next month.  Owners have also been pursuing developer Toplace in the Supreme Court since 2018 over alleged defects. The developer has previously told the ABC all defects identified have been minor in nature."}, "/news/2021-11-27/southern-cross-replica-ready-for-wings-over-illawarra/100631348": {"description": "Engines tested and take-off imminent for replica of one of Australia's most famous aeroplanes", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The Southern Cross is arguably Australia's most famous aircraft, and its exact replica is nearly ready to take to the skies again. Painstakingly restored by volunteers at the Historical Aircraft Restoration Society (HARS) over more than 10 years, the 1980s-built plane needed major repairs to fix a wing broken after an emergency landing in 2002. \"The wing was by far the major focus for us because it has the original wooden wing, and wooden wings are a thing of the past,\" Southern Cross replica engineer Jim Thurstan said. \"Even though I'm an old bloke, I didn't do much wood when I was young, but we've gathered people around here to pick up those skills and we just did it.\" The original Southern Cross was flown by Charles Kingsford Smith on the first transpacific flight from the United States to Australia in 1928. The plane's replica was the project of South Australian flying instructor John Pope, who created the plane as a travelling history lesson that would fly around the country. With three new engines freshly fitted and tested, the replica aircraft is expected to take off in 2022. \"It'll be very satisfying indeed, just getting it out to run the engines is a big step forward,\" Mr Thurstan said. \"It's always a significant point to run the engines because it means a whole lot of stuff is connected up, there's fuel and oil available and it puts life in the project and increases the enthusiasm as well.\" He said once the plane was airworthy again, it would hopefully resume its original purpose, travelling the country and teaching people about the early days of aviation. \"John Pope, who conceived it in the beginning, that's what he dreamed of doing and it was very successful. \"It flew in the Bicentennial celebrations and to New Zealand, but it flew around Australia, going to country towns where school children came out and a got a history of aviation in general.\" The original Fokker aircraft was flown by Sir Charles Kingsford Smith, Charles Ulm, Harry Lyon and James Warner from the United States to Australia in a 11,670-kilometre journey. That plane provided none of the comforts of modern aviation, and Jim Thurstan said the replica would be the same. \"Compared to modern planes, this is very primitive, but back in 1928 it's as good as it got — these were the jumbos of the day,\" he said. \"There were about 170 of them built in England, Holland and America and to fly in them would be noisy. \"They're not pressurised or air-conditioned, they'd be bumpy, hot and cold, but that's what it was.\" The aircraft with its new engines will be on display as part of Wings Over Illawarra this weekend – Australia's biggest air show. \"We've had people from all walks of life [work on the plane], and we did have pilots from Qantas help out when they were out of a job recently,\" Mr Thurstan said. \"Some will probably get to fly this aircraft, which a lot of pilots would like to do.\" Sign up here."}, "/news/2021-11-26/three-arrested-for-alleged-money-laundering-and-drug-trafficking/100654210": {"description": "Two men and a woman arrested in SA over alleged drug trafficking on the dark web", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " South Australia Police have charged two men and a woman with drug trafficking and money laundering after their alleged crimes were exposed on the dark web. Earlier this week SAPOL detectives and Australian Federal Police searched a home and a business in Adelaide and a property at Kings Park. Police seized more than $1 million in cash, $700,000 of cryptocurrency, along with drugs that are suspected to be cocaine, LSD, cannabis and steroids. Police said the drugs have an estimated street value of more than $150,000. Two homes and a sports motorcycle, collectively valued at $1.27 million, have also been seized in what police described as the \"largest ever seizure of cryptocurrency by SAPOL\". \"People using the dark web as a means to remain anonymous while conducting illicit activities should be warned that SAPOL actively investigates offending across dark web marketplaces,\" the statement read. A 27-year-old man and a 32-year-old woman, both from Adelaide, and a 24-year-old man from Kings Park, have been charged with multiple counts of commercial drug trafficking, money laundering and importation of a large commercial quantity of LSD. All three were remanded in custody after appearing in the Adelaide Magistrates Court. They will face court again on May 24."}, "/news/2021-11-26/nats-egypt-unveils-renovated-avenue-of-the-sphinxes-in-luxor/100653682": {"description": "Egypt unveils 3,000-year-old renovated Avenue of the Sphinxes in Luxor", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " Egyptian authorities have unveiled a renovated ancient promenade in the city of Luxor that dates back 3,000 years.  It's the latest government project undertaken to highlight the country's archaeological treasures. Egypt has struggled to revive its tourism industry, battered by years of political turmoil after the 2011 popular uprising that toppled longtime autocrat Hosni Mubarak, and more recently, the COVID-19 pandemic. The ancient walkway — known as the Avenue of the Sphinxes, but also dubbed the Way of the Rams and the Path of the Gods — connects the famous Karnak and Luxor temples in what was the city of Thebes, which was Egypt's capital in antiquity. It is believed to have been the path that pilgrims trod to visit the temples and pay tribute to their deities. Lined with statues of rams and sphinxes on pedestals, the ancient road in Luxor — which sits on the banks of the Nile River and is located about 650 kilometres south of Cairo — stretches for several kilometres and had been under excavation for more than 50 years. President Abdel Fatah el-Sisi and other senior officials attended a late evening ceremony on Thursday that nodded to an ancient autumn holiday. Mohamed Abd el-Badei, a top Egyptian archaeology official, said the oldest ruins along the pathway are six structures built by Queen Hatshepsut that date to 1400 BC. The mummies of 22 Egyptian rulers are taken in a procession through Cairo on their way to a new museum. He said that, according to hieroglyphics on the walls of one of the temples, the ancient holiday was known as Opet and was marked by parades and dancers in celebration of the bounty that the Nile's annual flooding brought to the fields. There was also a flotilla of sacred boats that made their way to the temple, according to the transcriptions. The event is the second glitzy ceremony this year to honor Egypt's heritage. In April, the government hosted a procession to mark the transfer of some of the famous mummies from the Egyptian Museum in downtown Cairo to the newly built museum south of the Egyptian capital.  "}, "/news/2021-11-26/uranium-miner-vimy-mulga-rock-project/100653578": {"description": "Uranium miner says it has beaten government deadline", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " The company developing Western Australia's first uranium mine says it has beaten a deadline set by the state government to begin operations. In December 2016, the former Liberal-National government granted environmental approval for the Mulga Rock project in the eastern Goldfields, 300 kilometres north-east of Kalgoorlie-Boulder. The approvals only last five years and have been further complicated by the current Labor government's decision to reinstate a ban on uranium mining. While a final investment decision on the $393 million Mulga Rock project is not anticipated until the second half of next year, Vimy Resources claims that the clearing of 143 hectares that cover the proposed open pit and the presence of an accommodation village ticks the box for the start of operations. The company has been progressing early site works since September, which also includes the refurbishment of an airstrip. Vimy Resources told the stock market today it has submitted documents notifying the Department of Water and Environment Regulation of \"substantial commencement\". Vimy's interim chief executive Steven Michael said the company had invested more than $20 million on the development of Mulga Rock over the past five years, with a further $8 million of expenditure approved as part of the early works program which is scheduled to be completed by the end of January. He said the mine would directly employ 550 personnel during construction and 350 workers once in production, generating more than $200 million in state royalties over its 15-year life.  \"The foundations are now in place to build a long-life, strategic resource project for Western Australia, and the board of Vimy is focused on rapidly advancing Mulga Rock to its next development milestone,\" Mr Michael said in a statement. \"Vimy will continue to work cooperatively with the various state and federal government departments to obtain the approvals required to ensure Mulga Rock delivers first uranium production in 2025. \"Once developed, Mulga Rock will produce 3.5 million pounds of uranium oxide per annum and will power eight nuclear power stations, which is equivalent to 70 per cent of Western Australia's greenhouse gas emissions, or 12 per cent of Australia's total emissions.\" Minister for Mines Bill Johnston was asked on Wednesday about the upcoming December 16 deadline. \"I can't comment on the progress of their project. That's a decision for them,\" he said. \"If they meet their approvals, then we'll have to respond to that.\" Mr Johnston said government policy is clear in opposing uranium mining. \"We can't retrospectively cancel approvals,\" he said \"Now, whether they've complied with their approvals, that's a legal question. I'm not able to answer that, and at the relevant time the authorities will have to examine those and make that decision.\" Toro Energy's Wiluna project in the northern Goldfields and the Kintyre and Yeelirrie projects, both owned by Canadian giant Cameco, are the other WA uranium projects granted environmental approval by the former government. Conservation Council of WA nuclear-free campaigner Mia Pepper said the Mulga Rock project still required a range of federal nuclear safety permits and licences before they can begin mining. \"What's worse, the company does not have the necessary financial capacity and so has not made a final investment decision to develop the mine,\" she said. According to company documents, it had $21.9 million in the bank as of September 30. \"At the end of the day, the project's economics simply do not stack up. \"In a clumsy attempt to prove 'substantial commencement' and without any clear plan or financial capacity, Vimy has begun recklessly clearing land, native vegetation and precious habitat for endangered species in the vague hope of beating their December deadline.\" Today's announcement by Vimy Resources comes after the company last week rejected a proposed merger with Perth-based company Deep Yellow, which is developing a uranium mine in Namibia. "}, "/news/2021-11-26/shopping-black-friday-cyber-monday-deals-discounts-retail-sales/100653396": {"description": "Be careful if you're planning to shop Black Friday, Cyber Monday sales, warns Choice", "article_category": "business", "article_text": " It used to be an American-only affair. The term Black Friday reportedly originated in the 1950s when factory workers would call in sick on the day after Thanksgiving, in order to have a four-day weekend. Then Black Friday became a once-a year in-store shopping event, with crowds of shoppers choking up malls across America the day after Thanksgiving. But in recent years US-based retailers have introduced Black Friday to other countries around the world. Black Friday and Cyber Monday are now firmly entrenched in the Australian sales calendar, rivalling more traditional sale events such as Boxing Day. The Australian Retailers Association (ARA) and Roy Morgan predict a record $5.4 billion will be spent in stores and online over the four days of Black Friday to Cyber Monday. But consumer groups are warning customers to beware before they open their wallets. A Choice survey found that almost all Australians (92 per cent) have heard of the Black Friday sales, with just over half (52 per cent) expressing an interest in buying something during this year's event. Choice carried out a six-month investigation, tracking the price of four espresso machines across 13 retailers, to see when the products were at their cheapest.  Although retailer prices fluctuated during Choice's investigation, it found that overall Black Friday didn't offer the best deals. \"Instead, we found cheaper, or similarly priced, options on various dates in the six months prior – up to 33 per cent cheaper in some instances,\" according to CHOICE editor Margaret Rafferty. \"This is just one example, but it goes to show that big discounts can be found year-round and you may not need to wait for Black Friday to get the best deal.\" However, Choice also tracked six months of price fluctuations to determine when each item was most expensive. \"Compared to those prices, Black Friday was cheaper by up to 25 per cent,\" it said, recommending people check the prices across a range of different retailers. Choice says that legally, retailers don't have to offer a refund or exchange if something's the wrong size or if a customer finds it cheaper elsewhere. It also warns that not all products available for sale are safe, and that price doesn't equal performance. \"Particularly when it comes to appliances and tech, there's so much variation and choice on the market, it's easy to get duped into buying a dud,\" Ms Rafferty said. \"We're seeing more and more Australians turn to independent reviews and testing to escape the marketing hype and pick up a genuine bargain.\" The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) has also been tracking whether retailers are offering customers actual discounts. Kogan Australia was sued UK-based consumer group \"Which?\" also carried out an investigation into Black Friday sales. It found that for UK shoppers, more than 90 per cent of Black Friday deals were the same price or cheaper in the six months before the sales event last year. The consumer association told shoppers to make sure the discounts were \"truly genuine\" ahead of this year's sales. It analysed items by looking at the prices offered by six companies every day during the six months before and after 2020's Black Friday, as well as on the day itself. It found that 184 out of 201 items from six retailers, which included Amazon, AO, Argos, Currys, John Lewis and Richer Sounds, were priced the same or cheaper before Black Friday in 2020. Which? suggests that before shoppers rush into impulse-buying a discounted product, that they check the price of the product across multiple websites and any footnotes about the offer. \"We've often found that more than one shop will sell a product at a similar price, but only one claims that the price is a special offer,\" Which? said. It said retailers often highlight savings in red \"as a way of influencing customers and they can be quite misleading\". \"When we looked at items on special offer across major retailers for the first half of 2020, we found that several products were listed at their lower price for longer than they were at their full 'was' price,\" it said. \"We've also found retailers using old RRPs (recommended retail prices) as 'was' prices, so they reflect the value of the item when it was first released, not its current value. \"Rather than automatically trusting anchor prices, it's better to check against other shops' prices to try to work out the true value of the item you're buying.\" The consumer group also suggests looking out for notes or signs explaining offers, noting that \"rules that govern special offers are vague\". \"We've seen notes that explained the product was actually only at the higher price for a fortnight, six months before the current offer,\" it said. \"Sometimes these notes [on so-called shopping deals] are well flagged, but sometimes they're completely buried.\" In response to the Which? investigation, which was reported by British media, Amazon told the BBC that it sought to \"offer our customers great value thanks to low prices all year round\" and that customers could \"easily compare prices, allowing them to make an informed purchase decision\". Australian Retailers Association chief executive Paul Zahra tipped a \"sales frenzy\" over the Black Friday and Cyber Monday shopping period.  \"November is now Australia's biggest shopping month of the year, and that can be mostly attributed to the spike in sales we see over Black Friday and Cyber Monday,\" he said. \"For the past two years, November has beaten December as the biggest month for Australian retail sales throughout the year. \"Black Friday and Cyber Monday can be credited with this trend as people snap up some bargains and shop early for Christmas.\" supply chain issues \"With our supply chains under significant pressure, consumers need to be shopping early if they want their products to arrive in time for Christmas,\" he said. \"There are several issues that retailers are navigating at the moment — everything from COVID impacts, shipping delays and threats of industrial action from port workers and delivery drivers. There's a perfect storm of issues so consumers need to get in quick to ensure they get the products they want.\" Choice says while better discounts can be found at other times of the year, if it's an item you are desperate for, it may still be worth adding that item to cart on Black Friday before it becomes unavailable due to supply shortages. \"Our investigation also found that, over time, several stores no longer carried the item in stock,\" Ms Rafferty said. \"This is typical of the appliance cycle – as products get older, they're often replaced with newer versions from the manufacturer.\" \"This may mean you can grab a good deal on old stock the retailer is trying to get rid of, but you also run the risk of it selling out before you've had a chance to add it to cart.\""}, "/news/2021-12-03/berri-disability-basketball-pilot/100661696": {"description": "Popular basketball program highlights need for inclusive team sports", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " A regional South Australian basketball pilot program is giving players of all abilities the opportunity to play and improve their skills. The Berri Blazers Basketball Club, based in the state's Riverland region, launched the Berri Blazers Disability Program for players of all abilities this season. It was offered as a pilot program after some players missed out on a spot in the club's teams for the Riverland intertown competition. Coach and club member Chrissy Eleftheriadis said it was originally planned as a six player, three-on-three program but quickly grew to 19 players. That demand has demonstrated the need for sporting clubs to offer inclusive options. \"I would love to see every sport having the opportunity to let all community members play whatever game they want to play, despite any disability or diversity,\" Ms Eleftheriadis said. Eight coaches volunteer with the program, including Jake Wade, whose younger brothers Trey and Finn play in the team. \"Having the opportunity to coach a program like this is great, I've seen a lot of improvements in the players and confidence wise as well,\" Mr Wade said. The ABC is featuring stories by and about people with disability leading up to and beyond December 3, the International Day of People with Disability. \"Coming out here every week, everyone's smiling. It's a really good environment to be in.\" Each Wednesday night players work on skills and end with a game with modified rules, including a limit of three goals per player to encourage teamwork. It is hoped the program may may also become a pathway for some players to join domestic and intertown competitions. \"One of our coaches takes away the players who are ready to really look at playing in a competition and he works on extending their skills and knowledge,\" Ms Eleftheriadis said. One of those players is Loxton High School student Logan Worbey, 16, who has gained confidence as one of the more experienced players on the court. \"At school I wasn't really in the best team, no one really wanted me to play with them because I was not that good, and I was always put in the team down,\" Logan said. Now he is enjoying a leadership role and helping other players develop their skills and confidence. \"I've been actually helping out a bit, whenever someone doesn't know what to do I give them a hand and then they can figure out how to do it.\" There are plans for the program to continue next season and to build opportunities for people of all abilities to enjoy match play by offering a domestic competition."}, "/news/2021-12-03/bathurst-1000-supercars-finale-when-is-it-how-can-i-watch/100664128": {"description": "Everything you need to know about the Bathurst 1000", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The Supercars season will roar towards its conclusion this weekend at Mount Panorama as part of a six-day festival of motorsport, culminating with the 161-lap Bathurst 1000 on Sunday. It's the 61st time the Great Race has been run around the historic Bathurst course and has all the makings of a classic, with this year's Supercars champion hoping to go back-to-back and an Aussie motorsport legend looking for one last tilt at glory. Here's everything you need to know about this year's Bathurst 1000. The The Supercars don't get on course until  There are two more practices on Friday before  Saturday features another couple of practice sessions before the always dramatic  Then, on  The race is exactly as advertised,  That's  How long the actual race goes for depends on a whole host of factors, including the amount of wet weather and the number of safety car periods, but you can be pretty safe in thinking it will run for about    Van Gisbergen also won last year's race with  Retiring Supercars legend  As for returning partnerships from last year, that's it. None of the other 23 teams raced together last year due to a variety of factors, including border closures. 2019 Bathurst winner and now IndyCar driver,  Some of the combinations to look out for are the two all-brother pairings of  Only once in the last six seasons has a    In fact,  However,  Of the 11 races at the Eastern Creek venue, Pasquale won five. He will partner with  In the other Shell V-Power Racing Team entry,  The forecast currently says  Despite the entire east coast copping an absolute drenching over the last week or so, and rain falling intermittently throughout the week, the Bureau of Meteorology is suggesting there will be  That's not to say there won't be drama though. Since 1987, there have been just two races that have not had to have the safety car deployed: 1989 and 1991. The most number of times the safety car has been deployed in a single race is 13 in 2000. You can follow all the action from Bathurst in our  If you want to watch the action, check out Fox Sports or Kayo. You can also catch the race on free-to-air with Channel 7 or 7plus."}, "/news/2021-12-03/patty-mills-don-award-evonne-goolagong-cawley/100671044": {"description": "Patty Mills becomes first basketballer to take home Don Award", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Patty Mills has become the first basketballer to win The Don Award, after his inspiring performance led the Boomers to a maiden medal at the Tokyo Olympic Games. In Tokyo Mills became the first Indigenous Australian to carry the flag into an Olympic Games opening ceremony, before he starred as the men's national team took bronze in Tokyo. Australia defeated Slovenia 107-93 in the bronze medal game with Mills topping the scoring with 42 points. The Don is presented annually at the Sport Australia Hall of Fame (SAHOF) awards to the athlete or team whose deeds most inspired the nation over the past 12 months. The Brooklyn Nets guard who is presently in the US with the NBA team said he hoped to continue to inspire others. “I go about my craft as a professional and learn ways to get better, trying to carry myself in a way that I think can inspire others,\" Mills said in a statement. \"Being recognised in this way to me isn’t about who I sit alongside, it’s about how I can inspire others with my journey. \"I never set out to win awards like this, I go about my craft as a professional and learn ways to get better and do so in carrying myself in a way I think I can inspire others. \"The honour isn't necessarily about me, it's about the impact on unity, identity, being proud of who you are and expressing that passionately.\" While Mills was awarded the top gong Australian tennis great Evonne Goolagong Cawley was awarded the inaugural Dawn Award, named in honour of SAHOF member Dawn Fraser, which recognises an individual, team or organisation — from this or a previous generation — who are courageous, brave and have changed sport for the better. \"I have been unwell and this has been the ultimate cheer-up for me. To be the first recipient makes it even more special,\" Goolagong Cawley said. World number 1 Ash Barty was glowing in her tribute to her idol, a winner of seven grand slam singles titles. \"Evonne was an incredible athlete but more than that, she has been an enormous inspiration to generations of Australians, and to me, as a mentor and a friend,\" Barty said. \"She played her career with courage, she played it with passion and with grace and she challenged the status quo in what was a really challenging time for women in sport. \"The way that she was able to provide a path for others to dare to dream is absolutely remarkable.\" The awards ceremony also announced eight inductees into the Hall of Fame: In addition, Dennis Lillee and Ian Thorpe were celebrated after being elevated to legend status in the Sport Australia Hall of Fame.  "}, "/news/2021-12-02/supercars-lee-holdsworth-eyes-off-bathurst-1000-win/100670822": {"description": "Supercars veteran eyeing first Bathurst 1000 crown", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Supercars veteran Lee Holdsworth is excited by what he describes as his best chance to win the Bathurst 1000, after topping Thursday's second practice session. After stepping away from full-time driving this year, Holdsworth is partnered with Chaz Mostert in their Holden Commodore for his 18th attempt to win at Mount Panorama. Holdsworth clocked the fastest lap time of 2 minutes 5.2258 seconds in the second session, which was exclusively for co-drivers. Mostert (2:05.1075) was second fastest in the opening practice session for lead drivers. Holdsworth's best finish in the Bathurst 1000 was third, back in 2009, with Michael Caruso. He performed strongly in last year's 161-lap race, but with 2014 winner Mostert in the main seat the pair are shaping as contenders. \"It's exciting because this is probably my best chance yet to get up the top and get some glory around here,\" Holdsworth said. \"It's been a long week, we've been here since Saturday so you don't want to exert yourself too early. \"It's a completely different mindset for me being a co-driver, I'm just trying to relax and take it all in.\" Jamie Whincup is aiming to conquer the Mount Panoroma Circuit for a fifth time to cap off a remarkable career behind the wheel. Last year's Bathurst 1000 runner-up Cameron Waters enjoyed solid support from co-driver James Moffat on Thursday. Waters claimed pole last year, but finished behind Holden pair Shane van Gisbergen and Garth Tander in the race. Ford driver Waters (2:05.0233) completed an impressive first-up drive to edge out Mostert in Thursday's opening practice session. Moffat then backed Waters's earlier efforts by finishing second in the co-driver practice session with a time of 2:05.6033. his final event as a full-time driver Lowndes (2:06.1647) briefly had the quickest time in the co-driver session, but ended up sixth. There will be two more practice sessions on Friday, before Saturday's top-10 shootout.  "}, "/news/2021-12-02/alex-carey-confirmed-as-australian-wicketkeeper-for-ashes/100668880": {"description": "Alex Carey confirmed as Australian wicketkeeper for first two Ashes Tests", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Alex Carey will replace Tim Paine as Australian wicketkeeper for the first two Tests of the men's Ashes series, after the South Australian was added to Australia's 15-man squad. The Redbacks' Carey was in competition with Western Australian Josh Inglis to replace the former Australian skipper, but Cricket Australia on Thursday announced Carey's inclusion in the squad, a week out from the first Test at the Gabba. Carey capped his bid for a spot in the team with a century for South Australia against Queensland in the domestic one-day cup competition last weekend. \"I think my game is in pretty good order … for me, it's to do my job behind the stumps, provide what I can with the bat and do it the way that I do it,\" Carey told reporters on Thursday. \"I'm going to go and play with a big smile on my face.\" Carey, 30, made his one-day international debut for Australia against England in Brisbane in January 2018, and began his T20 international career against New Zealand in Sydney a month later. He averages 34.73 in Sheffield Shield cricket for the Redbacks, with five centuries and 13 50s. Carey said he felt \"confident\" in his ability to keep to Australia's much-vaunted bowling attack, having played with them in the shorter formats of the game. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. \"I've been fortunate enough to keep to them in one-day cricket and some T20 cricket as well,\" he said. \"I'll be preparing how I usually would for a four-day match. I'll get behind the stumps to Gaz [Nathan Lyon] and the quicks. \"Hopefully we get outdoors soon, there's obviously been quite a bit of rain around [in Brisbane]. \"It is Test cricket and it is a dream come true, but my job is to focus on what I've done in the past to get to this moment and not be too overwhelmed.\" Carey said he felt for Paine and his family, expressing his and the team's support for the former Australian Test captain.  \"Hopefully we see him back as soon as possible,\" he said. National selection panel chair George Bailey said Carey deserved the opportunity to make his Test debut. \"Alex has been a regular member of the national side in white-ball cricket, particularly in the one-day game,\" he said in a statement. \"He is an excellent cricketer and a fine individual who will bring many great strengths into the team.\""}, "/news/2021-12-02/salah-stars-liverpool-everton-as-two-premier-league-games-halted/100668088": {"description": "Salah stars for Liverpool in Merseyside Derby as two Premier League games delayed due to medical emergencies", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " He may not have come close to winning the Ballon d'Or award, but Liverpool striker Mohamed Salah has reminded Merseyside rivals Everton just how dangerous he is with a match-winning brace at Goodison Park. On a night where two league games were delayed due to medical emergencies in the crowd, Liverpool maintained the pressure on league-leaders Chelsea, with a 4-1 victory and, yet again, it was Salah who made the difference. Egyptian superstar came seventh on the voting for the prestigious Ballon d'Or award won by Lionel Messi Salah continued his great run against Everton — scoring his 18th and 19th goals of the season in all competitions — as the red half of Merseyside maintained bragging rights in the derby. Jurgen Klopp's men came out and were switched on from the start. It took only nine minutes for skipper Jordan Henderson to complete a lovely move with a first-time shot from the edge of the area. The Reds were rampant, and Salah made it two at the 20-minute mark, making a run down the right side before cutting inside and curling a brilliant strike beyond Jordan Pickford into the far corner of the Everton net. The Toffees managed to hold the line, and gradually got back into the game — when Richarlison played a great through ball for Demari Gray seven minutes before the break, the winger controlled it and kept his cool to put it past Alisson, there was a huge roar from the stands at Goodison. However, the relief proved temporary. Liverpool again took control of the game in the second half, although they could not convert their chances until Everton and Seamus Coleman gifted them an opening in the 64th minute. Coleman failed to control the ball and let Salah in — the Egyptian used his pace to rush downfield before rolling the ball home past Pickford to re-establish a two-goal break. It took the wind out of Everton's sails, and Diogo Jota wrapped things up with a fourth in the latter stages. It's that man again, as Argentine superstar Lionel Messi wins the men's Ballon d'Or award for a seventh time, while the Matildas and Chelsea's Sam Kerr comes third in the voting for the women's Ballon d'Or. See how Australia voted. Liverpool has scored in every Premier League game this season and, after 14 games, they have scored 42 goals, nine more then the next-best side, Chelsea: In nine of those games, the Reds have put at least three goals past their opposition. Salah has at least four games left before Christmas for Liverpool. If he scores another four goals before Christmas, he will match the club record of 23 goals in all competitions set by Roger Hunt in the 1960s. There were boos at full-time from Everton fans, who will be concerned their team has just 15 points from 14 games. Everton is only five points clear of the relegation zone, and Rafael Benitez' men have difficult games coming up against Arsenal, Crystal Palace, Chelsea and Leicester before Christmas.   Meanwhile, Chelsea stayed top of the English Premier League with a hard-fought 2-1 win at Watford, in a match that was halted for 32 minutes in the first half after a spectator suffered a cardiac arrest. Substitute Hakim Ziyech grabbed the winner for the leaders in the 72nd minute, converting a cross from Mason Mount — the England midfielder who had put Chelsea in front in the 29th. By then, the teams had been taken off by the referee because of the medical emergency in the stands that happened after about 13 minutes. The incident happened on the side of the field where Chelsea left back Marcos Alonso was stationed and he appeared to alert the referee and the medical staff on the touchline. That spectator was stabilised and taken away on a stretcher to applause from the crowd. Emmanuel Dennis equalised for Watford in the 43rd minute after Ruben Loftus-Cheek — one of a number of fringe players handed a start by Chelsea manager Thomas Tuchel — was dispossessed in the centre circle by Moussa Sissoko, who drove forward and set up his teammate to score. Chelsea remained a point ahead of Manchester City and two clear of Liverpool on a night when all three teams won. There was also a delay at Southampton, where the second half of the Saints' match with Leicester was delayed for 15 minutes due to a similar emergency in the crowd. The game finished 2-2, with the visitors coming from behind twice — thanks to goals from Jonny Evans and James Maddison — to earn a share of the points. Defending champions Manchester City also kept up their momentum with a 2-1 away win at Aston Villa, thanks to goals from Ruben Dias and Bernardo Silva — it was a first loss for Villa under new manager Steven Gerrard. In other games, West Ham drew 1-1 with Brighton and Wolves and Burnley finished goalless.    "}, "/news/2021-12-02/no-knockouts-no-matildas-for-perth-at-2023-fifa-womens-world-cup/100668296": {"description": "No knockouts, no Matildas: Perth misses out on 2023 Women's World Cup blockbusters", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Western Australia has missed out on the most sought-after games at the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup, with no knockout matches and no Matildas games to take place in Perth. FIFA today released the match schedule for the tournament, set down to run in Australia and New Zealand from July 20 to August 6, 2023. The tournament will feature games held in nine different cities and 10 separate venues across the two host nations. Perth Rectangular Stadium will hold just five matches, the equal lowest number of any of the host cities across Australia and New Zealand. All of those will be in the group stage, with Perth the only one of the five Australian host cities not to host a single game from the knockout phase. Perth has also missed out on hosting any of the tournament's top seeds, effectively ending the city's hopes of welcoming women's soccer's biggest drawcards like current world champion the United States of America or Olympic champion Canada, significantly reducing the tourism potential of the event for WA. Perth will host one match from the Matildas' group B, but it will not feature the Australian side. The Matildas' group games will take place in Sydney, Brisbane and Melbourne, and if they progress, their first sudden-death match will be in Sydney or Brisbane. All four of the other Australian cities including Adelaide will host matches in the knockout round of 16 phase, with Brisbane and Sydney to host quarter-finals. The semi-finals will take place in Sydney and Auckland, with the third-place game in Brisbane, and the final at Sydney's Stadium Australia on Sunday August 20. Out of a total of 64 games, 35 will be held in Australian venues, while 29 will be held in New Zealand. WA Sports Minister Tony Buti did his best to put a positive spin on the match schedule for the state. \"Obviously we'd love to have Sam Kerr playing in Perth, but we will have nine international teams playing in Perth,\" he said. \"We are one of five venues in Australia. Many other cities in Australia will not have any games. \"I think when you get to the World Cup, having any international teams playing here in Perth will be really exciting. \"Being a fan of the World Cup, men's and women's, I can tell you now the best games are usually the early games because that's where the teams are freer, they're not so concerned about being knocked out. When you get to the knockout stage, often the games are not as exciting as the first-round games. \"We have five games, there are some cities in Australia that have no games. \"Let's look at the positivity, we have nine teams playing football in Western Australia in Perth.\" July 20 - August 6                    "}, "/news/2021-12-02/jockey-missing-after-late-night-surfers-paradise-swim/100668202": {"description": "Search for jockey now a recovery effort, police say, after late-night Gold Coast swim tragedy", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Police now fear the worst for Gold Coast jockey Chris Caserta, missing in the ocean off the Gold Coast, but say efforts to recover his body will continue.  Emergency services and volunteers are searching for Mr Caserta, 26, who disappeared during a swim at Surfers Paradise about 10pm yesterday. According to Queensland Police, Mr Caserta had been swimming with a 25-year-old woman at the Esplanade when onlookers noticed them struggling in the water. Passers-by were able to help the young woman from the water, but not Mr Caserta, who has not been seen since. According to a QPS spokesperson he was last seen wearing black shorts. The woman was taken to hospital in a stable condition. It is understood police were able to identify the pair through CCTV, with footage showing them entering the water. Land, air, and sea search efforts continued until about 1:30am and recommenced at first light this morning. Mr Caserta is originally from Victoria. Water police officer in charge Senior Sergeant Jay Notaro said it was unlikely Mr Caserta had survived after getting caught in a rip. \"I can confirm the man is Chris Caserta, who is a well-known jockey in the horseracing industry, \"Unfortunately, I had the heartbreaking job of telling Chris's parents that this is not a search and rescue for Chris,\" he said. \"We are searching for Chris's body because the time frame for survival has passed \"It is an absolute tragedy at any time, but particularly just before Christmas.\" Sen Sgt Notaro offered condolences to the 26-year-old's family, friends and colleagues in the racing industry. \"We will continue to search and our goal is to return Chris to his family,\" he said. Surf Life Saving Queensland’s Nathan Fife said Mr Caserta had swam out behind waves, while the woman he was with swam in a more shallow area. Onlookers came to their aid after the woman began screaming for help, but Mr Caserta wasn’t seen again. “We had teams out all night and again this morning, searching one kilometre south and two kilometres north of where he’s gone missing,” Mr Fife said. South Australian racing Coach Dean Pettit said the racing community was hoping for the best but \"fearing the worst\".  The former jockey and racing presenter said Mr Caserta \"gives his all\" whenever he is racing and has friends across the country and the world. Mr Pettit said he had had moved to the Gold Coast from Victoria about 18 months ago to reinvigorate his career in racing. Mr Caserta previously raced in South Australia. \"He moved to Queensland for a fresh opportunity and I understand in the past six weeks he was starting to make a good impact,\" he said. Mr Pettit says Mr Caserta is a family-oriented man with a \"big smile\". \"What's happened is affecting a lot of people and we're just really hoping for the best, but the racing community knows this doesn't look good,\" he said. Close friend Jaden Lloyd described the jockey as an \"absolute legend\". \"He wouldn't harm anyone and it's just absolutely tragic. He's one of the nice guys,\" he said. \"I spoke to him about 30 minutes before he went out for a swim and he seemed fine at that stage. \"I know he was with a girl... she's been rescued... but then, he's obviously gone missing.\" Mr Lloyd said the woman knew Mr Caserta through the Gold Coast Turf Club. He said the pair were friends and had gone to dinner before heading out for a swim. Mr Lloyd and another friend have been waiting on the shore this morning as the search and rescue operation for Mr Caserta continues. \"We're both shattered and we're just praying for a miracle and hoping for a bit of good news,\" he said."}, "/news/2021-12-02/qld-western-ranch-rodeo-training-women-for-us-saddle-bronc-comp/100662114": {"description": "'It's pretty violent': Meet the Queensland women honing their saddle bronc skills", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Every time ringer Emily Howkins jumps on a bucking bronc, she prepares for the fight of her life. While the Emerald resident didn't grow up riding horses, she has found a passion for the rough stock rodeo ring. After riding at an event in Gatton and later submitting videos of winning rides, the 28-year-old has received an invitation to compete in saddle bronc riding at the women's world final competition in Wyoming next year, an event organised by the Texas Bronc Riders Association. \"I never really had a chance to ride horses, but I started riding racehorses and mustering and I kept getting bucked off,\" Ms Howkins says. \"I just thought, 'I've got to go to some of these schools and work out how these cowboys stay on these things'.\" Ahead of competing against the world's best, she is honing her skills with the newly formed Western Ranch Rodeo Australia, a group in Queensland's Central Highlands dedicated to training women riders to help them break into the male-dominated sport. Riding broncs is, \"like an explosion that you're trying to control. It's pretty violent,\" she says. \"You compete against yourself and the horse, but you want to win and you want to ride well, but you just want your mates to go real well too. \"Your fight is against you and your horse.\" There is growing interest in the American-style sport in Australia, but a lack of training opportunities prompted Cameron Eiser to take the reins of the new group. \"I've ridden a lot in the saddles and seen an opportunity to try to help the girls who want to get to the [United] States,\" Mr Eiser says. \"We just put on a practice day and built from there. \"The most rewarding thing is seeing progress and being a part of it … and seeing how happy it makes a lot of women, giving the ones with a bit of a wild side something to do.\" In saddle bronc riding, every second counts. To qualify, competitors must stay on their horse for eight seconds and hold on with either one or both hands. If they lose their grip, it's over. \"If a horse bucks really well and a girl tries really hard, they're going to get a higher score than a medium-range horse and rider,\" Mr Eiser says. \"The rules are it's got to be a strictly working ranch saddle, so an everyday saddle not tinkered with too much.\" Ms Howkins says up until recently, women were not encouraged to succeed in the sport. \"If you got to a men's saddle bronc school, afterwards the boys will get support. \"[There's] a lot of 'well, when's the next rodeo?' \"But when you're a girl, they kind of are like, 'well you had a turn, you had a try, you did OK. That's enough now'. \"[Before] you had to either try to ask a saddle bronc rider or email someone in America, and these [Western Ranch Rodeo Australia] fellas being here now is real good. It helps a lot.\" Brisbane's self-described \"concrete cowgirl\" Emily Collits also dreams of competing in the US. \"I want to eventually make it over to the [United] States and show the fellas that we're to be taken seriously and the Aussie girls can ride just as well as the ones over there,\" the 24-year-old says. \"I think a lot of women are interested, but it's like anything in a male-dominated sport, you can be quite nervous to break into it. \"But I reckon give it a go. You'll find out there's a really good community of girls in there and they'll support you.\" The group currently runs practice days and jackpots, Mr Eiser says while the US-style events had not drawn huge crowds yet, they were designed to give the women a hint of what it is like to compete on the world's biggest stage with some of the best in the business."}, "/news/2021-12-02/fifa-releases-schedule-womens-world-cup-australia-new-zealand/100668102": {"description": "Sydney to host 2023 Women's World Cup final as Melbourne cops limited schedule", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " FIFA has released the match schedule for the 2023 Women's World Cup in Australia and New Zealand, with Sydney announced as the host of the final. The tournament — which will run from July 20 to August 6, 2023 — will feature games held in nine different cities and 10 separate venues across the two host nations. Of a total of 64 games, 35 will be held in Australian venues, while 29 will be held in New Zealand. Sydney will host 11 matches in total, with Auckland and Wellington hosting nine each, while Brisbane has been scheduled for eight games. Melbourne has been booked to host just six games in total — the same amount as Dunedin — while Perth, Adelaide and Hamilton have five each. And the Matildas will play all their games in Australia during the tournament. The Women's World Cup will begin in both countries on July 20, with an opening ceremony at Eden Park in Auckland ahead of the first match with the Football Ferns. In Australia, the Matildas will play their opening match the same day at the new Sydney Football Stadium. The dates for individual games and the team draw will be released later. July 20 - August 6                    "}, "/news/2021-12-02/wta-suspends-tournaments-in-china-over-peng-shuai-concerns/100668074": {"description": "Fears over Peng Shuai sees WTA suspend all tournaments in China, Hong Kong", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The Women's Tennis Association (WTA) is suspending tournaments in China over concerns for the safety of former doubles world number one Peng Shuai. Its immediate ban also includes tournaments to be played in Hong Kong. The decision comes as uncertainty remains over the safety of Ms Peng, who recently alleged on social media she was sexually assaulted by China's former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli. In a statement released on Thursday morning, WTA chief executive Steve Simon said the organisation \"in good conscience\" could not hold tournaments in China. \"I don't see how I can ask our athletes to compete there when Peng Shuai is not allowed to communicate freely and has seemingly been pressured to contradict her allegation of sexual assault,\" he said. \"Given the current state of affairs, I am also greatly concerned about the risks that all of our players and staff could face if we were to hold events in China in 2022.\" The editor of China's Global Times newspaper accused the WTA of \"coercing\" Ms Peng to \"support the West's attack\" on China. Known for his combative tweets, Hu Xijin has been outspoken on the scandal involving Ms Peng, even as Beijing has been largely silent and authorities have blocked discussions of the topic on China's internet. The 'disappearance' of Peng Shuai tells us so much about the Chinese Communist Party and its Achilles heel. \"WTA is coercing Peng Shuai to support the West's attack on Chinese system. They are depriving Peng Shuai's freedom of expression, demanding that her description of her current situation must meet their expectation,\" Mr Hu said on his official Twitter account. The WTA did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Mr Hu's post on Twitter, which is blocked in China. The Global Times, a nationalistic tabloid, is published by the ruling Communist Party's People's Daily. Mr Hu has said recent appearances by Ms Peng should have been enough to relieve or eliminate most concerns for the player. He claimed concerns for her welfare were being aired by people who were \"aiming to attack China's system and boycott the Beijing Winter Olympics\". China's foreign ministry did not immediately respond to a request for comment and calls to the organisers of the China Open tournament went unanswered. Mr Simon said the move to put a halt to the tour's play in China came with the backing of the WTA board of directors, players, tournaments and sponsors. He flagged the possibility that the suspension could result in cancellations of events beyond 2022. \"We're hopeful we get to the right place, but we are prepared, if it continues as it is — which hasn't been productive to date — that we will not be operating in the region,\" he said. After Ms Peng wrote on social media on November 2 about her alleged attack she disappeared from public life. Her social media post was removed within minutes. Even China's biggest tennis fans haven't heard about Peng Shuai's alleged disappearance, which is causing alarm among international tennis players and human rights groups. Chinese media has reported that Ms Peng attended a junior tournament in Beijing and the former doubles star also spoke with Thomas Bach, the International Olympic Committee president, saying she was \"safe and well\". with the European Union demanding proof \"While we now know where Peng is, I have serious doubts that she is free, safe and not subject to censorship, coercion and intimidation,\" Mr Simon said. \"The WTA has been clear on what is needed here, and we repeat our call for a full and transparent investigation — without censorship — into Peng Shuai's sexual assault accusation. \"I have been gratified by the massive amount of international support the WTA has received for its position on this matter. \"To further protect Peng and many other women throughout the world, it is more urgent than ever for people to speak out.\" Mr Simon said he hoped the international community would \"continue to speak out so justice can be done for Ms Peng, and all women, no matter the financial ramifications\". The WTA head also said he remained hopeful that tournaments would return to China after Ms Peng's accusations were investigated. \"The tennis communities in China and Hong Kong are full of great people with whom we have worked for many years,\" he said. \"They should be proud of their achievements, hospitality and success. \"China's leaders have left the WTA with no choice. \"I remain hopeful that our pleas will be heard and the Chinese authorities will take steps to legitimately address this issue.\"  "}, "/news/2021-12-01/ashes-alex-carey-backed-to-make-impression-against-england/100666738": {"description": "'World-class' Carey backed to handle Ashes pressure", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Australian all-rounder Cameron Green says wicketkeeper Alex Carey will be able to handle the pressure of Test cricket should he be named as Tim Paine's replacement. Carey is expected to be picked ahead of Josh Inglis for the wicketkeeping role in the first men's Ashes Test the sexting scandal that saw him resign as the Australian men's Test skipper Carey has played 83 matches for Australia across the one-day and T20 formats. He stood in as ODI captain during Australia's series against West Indies earlier this year. Green said Carey would be up to the task if he was chosen to make his Test debut against England. \"Alex has been around for quite a while now in that international set-up,\" he said. \"I'm sure all the confidence he's gained from playing all the one-dayers will hold him in good stead. \"The experience that he brings … he's got a really good record in one-day cricket, he's really held that position down really well. \"Both the guys (Carey and Inglis) they could have gone for are world-class.\" Green is preparing for his first Ashes series after making his Test debut against India last summer. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. He averages 33.71 with the bat, however, is yet to take a Test wicket. The 22-year-old said injuries had previously dinted his confidence with the ball, but he was hopeful he could play his role in Australia's bowling attack against England. He has taken six wickets for Western Australia so far this Sheffield Shield season. \"Obviously the last few years I hadn't bowled much and had a few restrictions [because of injury],\" he said. \"So I'm sure this year, I've played most games bowling and that will hold me in good stead. \"There won't be as many nerves flying around this year, I'm really looking forward to it and hopefully I can help out.\""}, "/news/2021-12-01/australian-open-victorian-government-dismisses-vaccine-criticism/100665854": {"description": "Victorian government dismisses 'blackmail' claims from Djokovic's dad over Aus Open vaccine mandate", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Victorian Sports Minister Martin Pakula says Novak Djokovic is not being \"blackmailed\" by Australian Open organisers over their COVID-19 vaccine mandate. Pakula was responding to comments made by Novak Djokovic's father, Srdjan, who claimed his son \"probably won't\" contest the Australian Open because of the vaccine stance adopted by tournament organisers. all players must be vaccinated against COVID-19 if they want to compete at the major in January said the stance was tantamount to \"blackmail\" \"If you're a visiting international tennis player or a visiting sportsman of any kind, it's about your responsibility to the community that you are being welcomed into,\" Pakula said. There is further doubt over whether Novak Djokovic will compete at Melbourne Park, with his dad likening Tennis Australia's stance on player vaccination to \"blackmail\". \"And that's why we are asking those international tennis stars to follow the same requirements as Victorians are. \"It's not about blackmail, it's about making sure the Victorian community is protected. \"I want to make it clear that I really hope that Novak Djokovic gets vaccinated and plays in the Australian Open, but if he chooses not to that's a matter for him.\" Novak Djokovic has refused to reveal his vaccination status. The men's world number one's position is expected to become clearer in the next fortnight when entries for the Australian Open close. The 34-year-old has won nine Australian Open men's singles titles and is the defending champion. He shares the record of 20 men's major singles titles with Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal. The Australian Open begins at Melbourne Park on January 17.  "}, "/news/2021-12-01/englands-lionesses-hit-latvia-for-20-ellen-white-beats-record/100664402": {"description": "England's Lionesses hit Latvia for 20 as Ellen White beats scoring record", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " England have chalked up their biggest-ever competitive victory with a 20-0 humiliation of Latvia. The victory in the Women's World Cup qualifier also saw Ellen White break the Lionesses's scoring record on a busy night for the scorekeeper in Doncaster. Group A Sweden 3 Slovakia 0 Republic of Ireland 11 Georgia 0  Group D England 20 Latvia 0 Group E Denmark 3 Russia 1 Group G Romania 0 Italy 5 Group H Portugal 1 Germany 3 Bulgaria 1 Serbia 4 White bagged a hat-trick to take her tally to 48 from 101 caps for England, beating Kelly Smith's mark by two goals. Ten different players found the back of the net in a one-way encounter, with 21-year-old Lauren Hemp striking four times for her first goals with England. Beth Mead and Alessia Russo also claimed hat-tricks, with Ella Toone, Georgia Stanway, Bethany England with a double, Jill Scott, Jess Carter and Jordan Nobbs completing the demolition. England's previous record win dated back to 2005 when the team beat Hungary 13-0. England top Group D with a maximum 18 points from six games ahead of Austria and Northern Ireland on 13. They have now scored 53 goals in the qualifying campaign for the 2023 finals in Australia and New Zealand without conceding, leaving goalkeeper Mary Earps virtually unemployed. If elite sport is about grabbing opportunities when they come, then Clare Wheeler's Matildas appearance against the USA is a prime example, writes Samantha Lewis.  Latvia are at the bottom without a point, having conceded 46 goals and scoring twice in their five matches. In Dublin, Ireland also racked up the goals with an 11-0 thumping of Georgia at Tallaght Stadium in Group A. The home side took the lead in the fourth minute through a Georgian own goal and never looked back. Denise O'Sullivan led the way with a hat-trick, and things were made worse for the visitors when Maiko Bebia was sent off in the 69th minute.  "}, "/news/2021-12-01/women-engaged-in-sport-post-lockdown/100662470": {"description": "'I feel mighty': Women became more active during lockdown, says report", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " While the pandemic and rolling lockdowns over the past couple of years forced most people to stay put at home, a survey of physical activity of women in Victoria has revealed some surprising results. This Girl Can was originally devised in the UK and has now been imported by VicHealth to inspire women to get active The campaign encourages women of all body types and backgrounds to pursue activity, exercise and sport Dr Nicola McNeil from LaTrobe University says 40 per cent of participants reported an increase in their wellbeing A new survey has found hundreds of thousands of Victorian women actually took up physical activity during 2021 and were still doing it four months later. It's attributed to a targeted grassroots campaign called This Girl Can, a program deliberately bucking the so-called \"fitspiration\" trend, according to Melanie Fineberg, who runs the campaign on behalf of VicHealth. \"It's really the 'anti-fitspiration movement' in many ways,\" she said. \"We know from our research that women really aren't motivated by fitspo-style videos that feature toned and taut influencers getting active. \"That often does more harm than good for women who don't feel that they fit that mould.\" She said the campaign adapted to COVID lockdowns, encouraging working out at home through online tutorial videos — and the effort appeared to have paid off. \"We saw more than 340,000 women were inspired to get active to get active, one in six got active despite everything.\" Joys Njambi is a musical performer and a single mum, but also a keen boxer. \"I know that lots of us have hit that wall and now there is that anxiety about getting back out there, but you just have to bite that bullet and just go,\" she said. She first was inspired by the This Girl Can campaign when it was run in the UK. \"When I saw it in the UK, I was like, 'I have got to do this,'\" she said. Now, she's an ambassador for the campaign in Victoria, aiming to inspire other women to pursue an active lifestyle. \"When it comes to boxing, I just say, 'I am just a normal mum, I am not an athlete and I feel strong when I do it and I feel a bit mighty' and when you tell somebody that they think 'I want that! I want to feel strong and I want to feel mighty!'\" The campaign aims to take the expectation and judgement out of physical activity by relying on the stories of women like Ms Njambi, according to Ms Fineberg. \"The campaign is based on the insight that women worry about being judged when they are getting active, they think they're not good enough, they don't look the part and so the campaign is about empowering women to move their bodies regardless of age, size, background, shape and enjoy the movement,\" she said. Justine Streager, a 32-year-old mum in Melbourne's south-east, was one woman who took up a new physical hobby during 2021. \"I just thought, 'I have just got to get past this mental barrier of leaving the house,'\" she said. \"They have all these messages of 'stay home, stay home, stay home', even though we were allowed one hour of exercise. I really had to prioritise that exercise, because I found that if I didn't, I just felt really crummy all of the time [and] once I got out and about I never regretted it.\" The This Girl Can campaign inspired her to join an inclusive hiking and adventure group \"I read and watched every single ambassador story and taught me that there is something out there for everybody.\" Dr Nicola McNeil from LaTrobe University's department of management, sport and tourism crunched the survey results and said women reported improvements to their mental and physical wellbeing. \"We saw women who did something as a result of the campaign enjoyed a range of health benefits, 40 per cent reported improved wellbeing, 26 per cent reported better physical wellbeing and about 22 per cent reported a better sense of mental health,\" she said. She said 58 per cent of those who were inspired to get active by the campaign said they were committed to continuing to stay active for the rest of the year. \"Among the group of 'active responders', the women who reported doing something active as a result of seeing the campaign, 81 per cent of them were still active when we surveyed them four months later.\" Ms Streager is definitely hoping to make activity a life-long habit. \"What I have found is that the first time, I was filled with social anxiety and I was nervous and scared and worried about how I would be perceived and now I just rock up to a walk and so my comfort zone has expanded,\" she said. \"They're little steps when you look back on it, but they are huge in the moment, taking that step to join a group or trying something new and being ok with not being great at it, or being OK with being a beginner.\""}, "/news/2021-11-30/cricket-ashes-australia-alex-carey-set-to-make-test-debut/100663474": {"description": "Carey firming as frontrunner to replace Paine in Ashes opener", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Alex Carey is expected to be named as Australia's wicketkeeper for the first men's Ashes Test at the Gabba, with rival Josh Inglis returning home to Perth. Twenty20 World Cup squad members Inglis, Mitch Marsh and Ashton Agar have flown out of Queensland after being released from quarantine. Carey and fellow wicketkeeper Inglis are locked in a selection showdown to replace former captain Tim Paine in Australia's XI for the Ashes opener, which begins on December 8. was revealed he was involved in sexting scandal Carey has represented Australia in 83 limited-overs matches. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. He captained Australia A during the 2020/21season and has skippered Australia's one-day side this year, with his leadership having been held in high regard by coach Justin Langer for many years. The South Australian has also previously kept to Australia's Test attack in white-ball matches, another factor that may be weighing on selectors' minds. Australian Test great Ricky Ponting is among those who have backed Inglis to make a Test debut at the Gabba, completing what would be a remarkably rapid rise. Inglis is set to return to Brisbane soon after his pre-planned trip to see family, but the growing expectation is that it will likely be for an Australia A tour match rather than the first Test. An intra-squad match in Brisbane on Wednesday was set to reveal some selection clues, but wet weather is expected to ruin at least two days of that tune-up fixture. Australia will not name sides for the match, which is likely to resemble a centre-wicket session rather than a genuine contest. National selectors must also soon decide whether Usman Khawaja or Travis Head will bat at number five in the first Ashes Test.  "}, "/news/2021-11-30/australia-matildas-draw-with-usa-in-newcastle/100658892": {"description": "Matildas score late to snatch draw against world champions USA", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The Matildas have drawn 1-1 in their second and final friendly match against world champions USA in their last hit-out before January's Asian Cup. Australian winger Kyah Simon clawed a goal back in the dying stages of the game in Newcastle, cancelling out an early goal from American striker Ashley Hatch in the fourth minute. Matildas coach Tony Gustavsson made a few changes to the starting XI after Australia's 3-0 defeat to the USA on Saturday, switching out goalkeeper Teagan Micah for the more experienced Lydia Williams, while Hayley Raso and teen star Kyra Cooney-Cross also started ahead of Caitlin Foord and Jessika Nash. The Matildas started sluggishly, allowing Hatch and winger Margaret Purce time and space for a simple run and cut-back to open the scoring. But Australia rallied as the first half wore on, creating more opportunities going forward, particularly through returning winger Raso, though they continued having difficulties connecting crosses and through-balls for marked striker and captain Sam Kerr. The energy and tempo from both sides seemed to peter out after the break, perhaps a result of the sapping humidity in Newcastle after a day of rain. However, a flock of changes towards the end of the second half — including centre-back Alanna Kennedy and midfielder Clare Wheeler — brought new life to the Matildas, and it was Wheeler's crucial slide-tackle that started a move leading to Simon's equaliser, which was helped into the net by a nasty deflection from American centre-back Becky Sauerbrunn. The goal lifted the record-breaking crowd of 20,495 spectators — the second-highest for a Matildas home match in history — and the hosts were able to see out the draw, despite a late goal from USA midfielder Lindsey Horan that was called back for offside. With the Asian Cup now squarely in their sights, Australia will be happy with its improved scoreline, but questions still linger over squad selection and tactics; questions that Gustavsson must now try to answer without any more international windows to do so. Look back over the action with our blog. By Samantha L The 1-1 score-line certainly saves face for the Matildas after a fairly unimpressive performance against the USA in their final friendly match before their next major tournament. Tony Gustavsson now doesn't have the luxury of access to players or organised games against top ten nations to prepare for a tournament that he has said he wants to win. There are still a number of questions hanging over the side as they depart for their clubs, which this match didn't feel much closer to answering. But Gustavsson has one thing going for him: the Tokyo Olympics. Despite his short time with the side after taking over in January, he got the Matildas to an historic fourth-placed finish at that tournament in July. That run was part of his \"performance mode\" category, as opposed to the \"preparation mode\" of friendlies like these. The Tokyo result has allowed us to extend the benefit of the doubt to the side throughout this friendly series given that, in the lead-up to Tokyo, Australia copped some similarly concerning score-lines. But they were able to perform when it mattered. The big test, then, will come in January. Although we've somewhat dismissed the Asian Cup given its doubling-up as a World Cup qualifying path (which we don't need to use given we've automatically qualified as hosts), it is still a competitive tournament, and this team will be playing for a trophy they haven't held aloft in over a decade. If they're able to do it, it would arguably validate the bumpy lead-up. If he doesn't, then other questions should, perhaps, be asked. Once again, thank you for tuning into the ABC's live-blog of Australia v USA. It's been a joy bringing these two games to you and I hope we can do it again as the A-League Women's season kicks off this Friday. By Samantha L That was a chaotic final five minutes. Kyah Simon's goal in the 88th minute cancels out Ashley Hatch's fourth-minute opener. There are some tiiiired legs out there. The humidity up in Newcastle seemed to sap both sides of energy towards the back end of the second half. A draw is probably deserved: there certainly weren't as many clear-cut chances for either side as there were in the first friendly on Saturday, but the play on both sides wasn't of the same standard, either. Overall, drawing 1-1 with the reigning World Cup champions isn't too bad a result, though the performance itself may still concern some given this is the final big friendly the Matildas will play before the Asian Cup. What did you think of the match? A deserved score-line? By Samantha L They're not giving up, these Americans. No wonder they're ranked number one in the world. The final whistle is moments away... By Samantha L They couldn't get another and prove my prediction right... could they? By Samantha L It started with Wheeler: the tenacious midfielder won the ball after a risky sliding challenge on Ashley Sanchez, finding Catley who curled a cross in for Kerr, who had her back to goal. Kerr controls off her chest and passes off for Kyah Simon, who puts her foot through it. The ball spins off Sauerbrunn and spins past Murphy and into the net. Gustavsson has taken off down the sideline. Fireworks and flames are everywhere. The crowd has found their voice. USA 1 - 1 AUS. By Samantha L 85': Clare Wheeler comes on for Tameka Yallop to a big applause from her home crowd. The Americans bring on veteran defenders Emily Sonnett and Becky Saurbrunn to take over from Andi Sullivan and Sofia Huerta. By Samantha L 80': Tameka Yallop, stationed deep, miscontrols the ball off a deflected throw near half-way and has it pinched by Rose Lavelle. The USA are in behind Australia's defenders as Weaver sprints onto the bouncing ball, but Steph Catley sprints back and makes a sensational sliding challenge to take the ball out of Weaver's path. It almost certainly could've been 2-0 to the visitors without that intervention. By Samantha L USA 1 - 0 AUS. By Samantha L It's the 70th minute and, finally, we've got subs. Emily Gielnik replaces Hayley Raso while Alanna Kennedy comes on for Kyra Cooney-Cross. Kennedy immediately moves into the right side of a back three with Nevin central and Catley on the left, with Carpenter pushing further forward. Tameka Yallop has moved into midfield. There are subs for the USA, too: goal-scorer Hatch is replaced by Morgan Weaver, while Kristie Mewis comes on for Purce. Let's see if the Aussie subs can spark some joy and clean up this mess. By Samantha L It's another record crowd for a Matildas home game, beating the previous record of 16,829. It's also the second-highest ever crowd for a stand-alone Matildas game in history! Great work, Newy! By Samantha L 55': Sam Kerr receives a pass on half-way and turns on a dime, sending a perfectly-weighted pass behind the line for a sprinting Raso to latch onto down the right wing. Emily Fox puts in a brilliant sliding challenge to nick the ball away from Raso for a corner which, much like all the others tonight, comes to nothing for the Matildas. By Samantha L   Interestingly, it's not the Matildas' defence that has copped the most criticism from fans on social media during the half-time break. It's the midfield. Emily Van Egmond does not look comfortable playing as a defensive midfielder. She is capable, sure, but not comfortable, and certainly not threatening. Gustavsson explained his decision after Saturday's friendly as wanting a strong midfielder to go toe-to-toe with Lindsey Horan, but the USA veteran has arguably dominated the midfield across both games so far. Similar with Kyra Cooney-Cross. She is both more dangerous for club and country when given license to move forward: to act as a box-to-box or attacking midfielder. The only natural defensive midfielder Australia seems to have in the squad is Novocastrian Clare Wheeler, who you would expect will get the nod to come on this half to play in front of her home crowd. We've dissected the centre-back problem for several weeks now, perhaps it's time we take a closer look at the Number Six Conundrum? By Samantha L A charging run by Hayley Raso down the right finds Kerr near the top of the box, who wiggles around Tierna Davidson and shoots... but it skews well wide of the far post. Kerr looks in good spirits, though. She's a player who thrives with others around her, so the more Australia can provide players to support her going forward, the better. By Samantha L We're back for the second half: the final 45 minutes that this Matildas team will get together against a top side before January's Asian Cup. Let's see whether they can dig themselves out of the hole... By Samantha L Sam Kerr shows her frustration (Getty) Just like Saturday's friendly, the Matildas go into the break 1-0 behind after conceding early. They haven't created quite as many chances going forward as they did towards the back-end of Saturday's first half, which is disappointing. The closest Australia have come is Cooney-Cross' shot that ricocheted off the post and was cleared away. The USA have defended Australia's corners brilliantly, and are playing some lethal passing football in transition: all things Gustavsson spoke to pre-match and which the Matildas haven't addressed. What did you think of the first half? What changes (if any) would you like to see made for Australia? Who could change the game for them? By Samantha L 44th minute: Lynn Williams beats Nevin down the left flank and sends a deadly low cross to the far post. It's at the exact speed to be just out of reach of both goalkeeper and back-tracking defenders, but thankfully opposite winger Purce's shot hits the side netting. By Samantha L"}, "/news/2021-11-30/jordan-de-goey-returns-to-australia/100662368": {"description": "Jordan De Goey returns to Australia with AFL career in the balance", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Jordan De Goey has arrived back in Australia after months away in the United States as he prepares to face court via video link. The 25-year-old AFL player landed at Sydney airport on Tuesday morning with his Magpies career in the balance. De Goey was stood down by Collingwood last month after a night out in New York resulted in him charged with assault. He is due to face court on December 8, which he will be able to attend virtually. An earlier charge of forcible touching was dropped only days after the alleged incident at a Halloween-themed party at PHD Rooftop Lounge on October 30. De Goey travelled to the US during the off-season to undergo an intensive fitness program in California in an attempt to capitalise on a run of impressive on-field form at the end of the 2021 AFL season. He was only able to leave Australia under a permit due to his sponsorship and work arrangements with an energy drink company.  De Goey has played 118 games and kicked 155 goals for Collingwood after debuting in 2015. Jordan De Goey has faced several charges of violence against women during his AFL career, but was not stood down until last weekend. He finished fourth in the club's best-and-fairest award this year, capturing close to career-best form in the second-half of the campaign. Collingwood are yet to make a decision on De Goey's future, which will hinge in part on the outcome of the court case. \"It's a concern that he's found himself in a situation, which in the best scenario is he's been in New York and got into a bar fight that has seen him arrested, regardless of what happens with the court case,\" Magpies football boss Graham Wright told Melbourne radio station 3AW last week. \"We're really disappointed in it … until we get face-to-face with him and see where the court case goes, we're in that holding pattern.\"  "}, "/news/2021-11-30/woods-says-a-return-to-the-top-not-a-realistic-expectation/100662386": {"description": "Woods says a return to the top not a 'realistic expectation'", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Tiger Woods says he expects to play golf again, just not very often, and he doesn't see himself reaching the top of the sport again because he doesn't think it's \"a realistic expectation\". He says he can see himself picking certain tournaments to play, but not a full-time schedule. His extensive video interview with Golf Digest, with whom he has a financial relationship, was published Monday ahead of his first press conference since his right leg was badly damaged in a February 23 car crash in the Los Angeles suburbs. The 15-time major champion raised hopes of another comeback when Woods posted a three-second video hitting a short iron with the message, \"Making progress\". However, he didn't make it sound as though a return was around the corner. \"I have so far to go,\" he said. \"I'm not even at the halfway point. I have so much more muscle development and nerve development that I have to do in my leg. \"At the same time as, you know, I've had five back operations. So I'm having to deal with that. So as the leg gets stronger, sometimes the back may act up.\" Woods was recovering from another back procedure at the start of the year when he ran his SUV over a median and it toppled down a steep hill on a winding, sweeping road in the Los Angeles suburbs on his way to a television shoot at a golf course. Doctors said he shattered tibia and fibula bones in his right leg in multiple locations. Those were stabilised by a rod in the tibia. A combination of screws and pins were used to stabilise additional injuries in the ankle and foot. He last played at the PNC Championship with his son, Charlie, and then had a fifth back procedure that kept him out the early part of the year before the accident. Woods already had one remarkable comeback, winning the Masters in 2019 after fusion surgery, his fourth on his lower back. He won the Zozo Championship in Japan later in the year for his 82nd career victory on the PGA Tour, tying Sam Snead for the all-time record. \"I don't have to compete and play against the best players in the world to have a great life,\" he said. \"After my back fusion, I had to climb Mt Everest one more time. I had to do it, and I did. \"This time around, I don't think I'll have the body to climb Mt Everest, and that's OK. I can still participate in the game of golf.  Fifteen-time major winner Tiger Woods is undergoing surgery for \"multiple leg injuries\" after his car rolled off a Los Angeles highway. \"But as far as climbing the mountain again and getting all the way to the top, I don't think that's a realistic expectation of me.\" Woods is to be inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in March. The Masters is the first full week of April. Woods didn't have a timetable, only saying that he wished the recovery was going faster than it was. He said he could envision a career like Ben Hogan after his near-fatal car accident. Hogan played a limited schedule, though he still dominated the majors, including winning all three that he played in 1953. \"I think something that is realistic is playing the tour one day — never full-time ever again — but pick and choose, just like Mr Hogan did. Pick and choose a few events a year and you play around that,\" Woods said. \"I think that's how I'm going to have to play it from now on. It's an unfortunate reality, but it's my reality. And I understand it, and I accept it.\"  "}, "/news/2021-11-30/greyhound-trainer-anthony-bullock-rspca-cruelty-probe/100661386": {"description": "Racing minister defends greyhound industry amid RSPCA probe into dog euthanasing", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Tasmania's Racing Minister has defended greyhound trainers as \"animal lovers\" while confirming the state's most decorated industry participant is under investigation by the RSPCA. The state parliament has heard that Exeter-based trainer Anthony Bullock is being investigated by the Office of Racing Integrity and RSPCA after 18-month-old Tah Bernard was euthanased last week. The greyhound was injured at Launceston Greyhound Racing Club trials Tuesday evening, taken to the vet that night then euthanased on Wednesday morning, despite offers from Brightside Animal Sanctuary to help rehabilitate and rehome the dog. Greens leader Cassy O'Connor quizzed Minister for Racing Jane Howlett and TasRacing chief executive Paul Eriksson on why Bullock had not been suspended pending investigation. \"This is the same Mr Bullock who in 2017 was fined for giving his dog arsenic,\" Ms O'Connor told parliament. Referring to the Tah Bernard incident, Ms O'Connor said \"this is a trainer that took a squealing, agonised dog home overnight because he didn't want to pay an out-of-hours fee\". Mr Eriksson told the hearing it was not possible to stand him down. \"There is no scope in the rules for that suspension whilst this investigation [continues], and secondly there is an animal welfare matter,\" he said. Tasmania's racing watchdog is without a manager, vet and several stewards, as a union warns workers and the industry will suffer without intervention from the government.  \"If the individual was suspended he would need to reassign his dogs, which would create a significant problem.\" Ms Howlett said she was confident in Tasmania's industry participants and the existing rules and regulations, declining to comment on the investigation into Bullock. \"Greyhound industry participants are animal lovers and have a genuine concern for the welfare of their greyhounds,\" Ms Howlett said. \"The government, TasRacing and the Office of Racing Integrity and participants are continually working to improve greyhound welfare in Tasmania.\" Bullock declined to comment. OzChase data published by TasRacing showed the number of retired dogs euthanised or deceased last financial year was down on previous years, at a total 58. The majority of retiring dogs, 259, were rehomed. About 3 per cent of starters (369 dogs) were injured on the track in the same financial year, with seven of them euthanased. Set the ABC News website or the app to  Here's a taste of the latest stories from Tasmania:"}, "/news/2021-11-30/adelaide-lightning-key-players-missing-wnbl-season/100661090": {"description": "'It's going to be tough for us': Adelaide Lightning forced to prepare without key players ahead of WNBL season", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Adelaide Lightning coach Chris Lucas says this year's WNBL preseason has been the toughest of his career. South Australia's COVID-19 requirements and border restrictions have meant he has only had a full squad together for a couple of weeks ahead of the upcoming season. At one point he had just eight players available to train with. \"It has been challenging … probably the most challenging preseason I've ever been involved in,\" Lucas said. His last two players arrived in Adelaide from Melbourne last week, after the state's borders opened up on November 23. Adding to his frustration, other teams in the league haven't had to endure the same restrictions interstate. \"Whether those girls physically can get through the training that first week [is a question],\" he said. \"We may have to use a couple of our reserves in the first game. \"The states like Victoria and New South Wales that have been in heavy lockdown, they've been in full training for three weeks. \"The Melbourne Boomers' imports arrived on the floor with no quarantine … that's completely different to what we've experienced.\" The Lightning had four players who had to quarantine for two weeks after travelling to Adelaide from America, including Alanna Smith and Kylee Shook. Another forced to quarantine was US import Kiana Williams, who signed from the Seattle Storm in the WNBA. The dynamic guard has only had a few days to get up to speed with her new teammates ahead of her first season in Australia. \"I had a bike and some weights but, you know, just knowing that you're stuck in one place, you can't go out for a run or anything, I think that was the challenging part,\" Williams said. \"It's a challenge but we're going to figure it out and get through these practices and look forward to opening night.\" Her Seattle Storm teammate and Lightning captain Steph Talbot also had to quarantine after arriving back in Adelaide. But the reigning WNBL MVP has remained upbeat, despite having limited time to prepare her team. \"Our second string of players have really had a chance to build and build a cohesion,\" Talbot said. \"I think that's going to be good for us because if they can be good off the bench we're going to have really good depth.\" That depth is sure to be tested early in the season, but Talbot said finals basketball was still achievable for the Lightning. \"If we can build some chemistry we definitely have some potential to make finals and then hopefully go all the way,\" she said. Her coach's expectations are just as high, but he acknowledged that the club was in for a challenging season. \"It's going to be very tough for us. I think we'll build over time, but hopefully we can build quickly,\" Lucas said. The WNBL season starts this Saturday, with the Adelaide Lightning opening their campaign at home against Townsville on December 11."}, "/news/2021-11-30/ed-cowan-on-why-pat-cummins-is-he-right-captain/100660620": {"description": "'One of the great fallacies': Test opener weighs in on Pat Cummins captaincy", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Former Test opener Ed Cowan has defended Cricket Australia's decision to hand Steve Smith the vice-captain role for the Ashes Test team, while lauding the decision to pick Pat Cummins as skipper. The Grandstand Cricket podcast with Corbin Middlemas \"I'm excited by this,\" Cowan said. \"It was probably pooh-poohed a little bit when the whole Sandpapergate story went down. I was calling for Pat Cummins to be captain then. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. that's one of the great fallacies \"He's going to be well supported. I'm excited by the person he is, the cricketer he is. I think he's going to lead by example on and off the field.\" Cummins will replace Tim Paine as captain after the wicketkeeper stood down over a sexting scandal from 2018. Paine, in turn, had replaced Smith as skipper after Australian opener Cameron Bancroft was caught using sandpaper on a ball against South Africa in 2018. Cowan said he was surprised some cricket fans had reacted with animosity towards Smith being announced as vice-captain. \"My view on this is that people love taking the moral high ground and forget very easily that we've all made mistakes,\" he said. \"What happened in many ways was a watershed moment. You're allowed to learn, you're allowed to grow. He's not the captain. \"He took a massive fall for effectively the team's error, let's move on. I don't understand why anyone would be so unhappy with any kind of comeback story around Steve Smith's leadership.\" Cowan said he thought Cummins and Smith would work well together and fill any perceived gaps in their leadership style. Australia's new men's Test captain is not afraid to admit he has flaws, a characteristic that may help him thrive in the role. \"Without doubt, someone with the tactical nous that Steve Smith has, he understands the game of cricket better than anyone than I’ve ever seen. He’s got a wonderful cricket brain, and it allows him to focus purely on thinking about how to add value to the team and the leadership group through that tactical lens,\" Cowan said. \"His weakness is as a leader of people and empathising with teammates and helping them on that journey and it’s the off-field stuff as well and that’s where Cummins will excel. \"I think, as a duo, they’re really going to complement each other from a strength and weakness capability point of view.\" As spots in the starting 11 for the Ashes start to tighten up, Cowan said the battle for a place in the top order between Usman Khawaja and Travis Head would come down to who had the greater match-winning ability. \"Usman is a match winner. When he gets runs, he gets the hard runs. We saw him get 100 the other day when Queensland got 150 on a tricky wicket. His 100s are match-winning 100s. He can play all around the world,\" Cowan said. \"I would love to see Travis Head in the Test team at some point in time, he is a fine player. But, when it comes head to head with someone else and selection is inherently that, who is the best person for the job at some point in time? \"Usman is 34, genuine leadership capability … he can help Pat Cummins without doubt, not just tactically, but leading people. \"His Test record speaks to that, his first-class record speaks to that and, I think, for the next 18 months, with the Test team having not performed recently and having not played much Test cricket, let’s go for the Test team. There’s going to be plenty of time for Travis Head when he’s 29 to play 50, 60, 70 Tests.\" While the decision on who would captain the team after Paine stood down has been sorted, the debate over who comes in as wicketkeeper rolls on. Alex Carey and Josh Inglis are the leading candidates, and Cowan said there was a delicate balance between picking a strong wicketkeeper and a strong batter. Josh Inglis is waiting to find out if he or Alex Carey will take the gloves in the first Ashes Test. Whether he is picked or not, the English-born keeper says his rapid recent progress is largely due to work with a sports psychologist. \"I would pick who is the best keeper to spin bowling because we’ve seen in the past what happens to Nathan Lyon as a key member of the Australian team,\" Cowan said. \"If you start dropping catches off the spin bowler, either in Australia or travelling to the subcontinent, it puts a hell of a lot of pressure on the fast bowlers.  \"My only question around Inglis … he’s a good keeper, he’s got X-factor with the bat, but he has to be picked as the best keeper. Is he the best keeper? He keeps at the WACA or Perth Stadium, he doesn’t keep to spin bowling. \"Alex Carey, who has kept to Zampa, he’s kept around the world in one day internationals, he’s done a good job when he has had to keep in tricky conditions and I think is a superior keeper, maybe just by 10 per cent, maybe by 15 per cent, not sure, but it’s enough for him to be picked solely as a wicketkeeper. \"Forget the X-factor with the bat, if the wicketkeeper is dropping catches we’ve got bigger problems.  \"If Inglis gets picked, so be it, I think he’ll do a great job. \"He's done it in international cricket. He was in the team of the tournament at the ICC World Cup, he basically single-handedly held the Australian middle order together. This guy loves pressure, he loves it.\" The first Test is scheduled to begin on December 8 at the Gabba. Listen to all the action live on ABC Grandstand and follow the match through the live blog at abc.net.au/sport."}, "/news/2021-11-30/alyssa-healy-mental-health-movember/100659456": {"description": "Why Alyssa Healy worries about elite sport's mental health pressure", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " It's safe to say that this WBBL season did not go to plan for Alyssa Healy and the Sydney Sixers, with the competition's most successful side languishing on the bottom of the ladder for the first time. However, while Australia's star wicketkeeper was sidelined from this year's finals series, she has been putting her time to good use by raising funds for mental health charity Movember, a cause she says she has a \"simple\" reason for getting behind: \"I've got a lot of great men in my life that I don't want to see die young,\" she says. \"I want to see these men in my life as long as possible.\" The Movember Foundation has a clear goal: By 2030, it aims to reduce the number of men dying prematurely by 25 per cent. In Australia, three out of four suicides are men, and more than six men die by suicide each day.  With a number of high-profile male athletes having voiced their struggles in recent years, Healy says sport is doing its part to further a conversation about mental health. \"I think high-profile athletes coming out and saying that they're struggling is a really great thing for society. It sort of normalises those conversations,\" she says. Sport is also an ideal place, Healy says, to model a \"team-based\" approach to supporting someone who is struggling with their mental health. \"Sport is all about teamwork and camaraderie,\" Healy says. \"The more we can stick together as a team and look after one another, the better. \"Normally, when an athlete sticks their hand up and says they're struggling, it's right in the face of the media, but if we [as teammates] knew about it behind closed doors first, maybe we could stop it from reaching that final point.\" Healy adds that, while she has not necessarily had her own mental health struggles, she believes it is all the more important that she is open about the pressures of being an elite athlete. \"I think [the pressure] is something that's ever-present in every professional athletes' life,\" she explains. \"A big part of it is performance anxiety, and that has a real impact on your everyday life when you're stressing about your work 24/7. \"It's almost more important for those of us who can't necessarily say that they've gone through something [major], to stand up and say, 'You know, it's OK and I'm here for you. Let's have a conversation about how I can help you'.\" Healy has also noticed a shift in the pressure placed on women as athletes, especially as women's sport garners greater levels of coverage and attention. Poonam Yadav is part of the Indian cohort driving record WBBL ratings. The leg-spinner opens up on bonds formed with her Heat teammates. \"You look at the WBBL this season. Every single game was on telly, which is so cool for our sport but with that comes a high level of scrutiny. \"All of a sudden it hits home, that people are watching and commentating on what you're doing 24/7. \"It's not necessarily the norm in everyday life, that people are scrutinising your work all day, or discrediting it. \"I think the more that women's sport grows, the more the level of scrutiny grows.\" This scrutiny, says Healy, often fails to take into account that many women who play sport at the highest level are not fully professional. \"What cricket is doing is great. At the international level, we are full-time and we're really lucky to do that; we tour a lot, we play a lot. \"But, at the domestic level, it's still transitioning. More often than not, female athletes, at this point in time, are not fully professional. They've got lives outside of cricket and sport that need attention. \"It's great for women's sport in this country that it's almost like a competition between sports to see who can professionalise their sport first. But I think there's going to be a few wrinkles to iron out over the next five years to ensure that's a smooth transition.\" Another potential issue for women's sport, says Healy, is an increasing reliance on social media to market the game. \"Social media is a huge part of our sport. It's such a great platform for us to show who we are and grow the game. \"In saying that, there are certain dangers about being on social media and copping abuse is definitely one of them; that doesn't help anybody's self-esteem or mental health.\" Women often face different types of abuse to men online, including in the context of sport. Almost half of all Australian women have experienced online harassment Women under 30, meanwhile, are particularly vulnerable to online abuse, with more than 75 per cent experiencing harassment. The risk of abuse is something the 31-year-old is acutely aware of, particularly with some of her younger teammates who are \"on social media platforms 24/7\". \"We've had situations where we're sitting down as a group, reading out some of the messages we've got, and while we laughed it off, not everyone will take it as a joke. \"People do take it seriously and that can be quite damaging.\" As one of her sport's more-confident characters, Healy says her own approach to dealing with abuse online is to \"call it out\". \"I like to respond to people every now and then, which probably gets me in trouble more often than not. \"For instance, the other day, someone had a crack at me about smiling after a loss. So I said, 'I'm trying to enjoy my sport, and [my form] is at rock bottom at the minute, quite literally.' Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. \"But if I can be seen to be enjoying myself, and make sure the young kids around me are having a great time, then, you know, it's just a game at the end of the day.\" Nonetheless, while Healy is confident in her own ability to deal with online abuse, she says the onus must be on social media companies to moderate content, as well as holding perpetrators to account. \"It's on the individual to think before they post or tweet or message. Before you hit send, make sure that you'd be happy receiving that feedback from someone else. \"There's people out there that see it as a sort of faceless platform, just to throw abuse and criticism around. And that's really not OK.\""}, "/news/2021-11-30/veteran-cricketers-hoping-to-claim-world-record-for-oldest-match/100660864": {"description": "These cricketers are hoping to smash a world record as the oldest teams to play a match", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The Ashes series might only be days away, but today all eyes will be on Victoria's veteran cricketers as they attempted to bat and bowl their way into the Guinness World Records. Players are hoping to claim the record for the world's oldest age cricket match to be played at Elsternwick between the Jack Blackham XI and Billy Murdoch XI. The teams, named after two former Australia captains who played in the very first test match against England in 1877, have an average player age of more than 80. Wodonga's John Hind just made the cut and will be one of the youngest players to take the field at the age of 78. \"I did say to my grandkids, wouldn't it be ironic if your grandfather at this stage of his life couldn't get a game of cricket because he was too young,\" he said. The match was organised with Veterans Cricket Victoria as part of promotion for the upcoming Ashes series. Mr Hind said he put his hand up for selection when he heard about the match and the world record attempt. \"I'm not sure what the process is at the end, but it would be nice to be in there.\" Mr Hind who regularly plays for Wodonga Cricket Club's over 60s and over 70s teams, said while he doesn't consider himself a cricket tragic, he didn't start playing to later in life. \"I didn't play a heck of a lot in my youth, but I've always loved the game. \"I just love playing it and as I got older, I was looking for a sport to do.\" Mr Hind said while a world record would be nice, the chance to be involved in the match was enough. \"It just goes to show you can keep playing cricket well and truly into your older age.\""}, "/news/2021-11-30/brandon-smith-to-depart-melbourne-storm-end-of-2022-nrl-season/100660628": {"description": "Brandon Smith to depart Storm at end of 2022", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Melbourne have announced Brandon Smith's departure at the end of the 2022 NRL season, with the club's CEO saying the Storm were \"deeply offended\" by the hooker's controversial podcast comments. Brandon Smith has issued a statement on social media responding to backlash from a recent podcast  The Storm hooker has reportedly left his club and the NRL unhappy with his behaviour during the interview NRL CEO Andrew Abdo says the integrity unit is investigating the matter  The New Zealand Test player will remain with the Storm next season but is believed to be joining the Sydney Roosters beyond that. Storm boss Justin Rodski issued a statement on Tuesday saying they had received written confirmation of Smith would leave the club when his current contract expired. Rodski condemned Smith's profanity-laden podcast interview, aired Sunday, in which he revealed his desire to play for the Storm's fierce NRL rivals, the Sydney Roosters. The Storm were left seething after the 25-year-old admitted he looked at the Roosters' famous jumper during a meeting and said to himself: \"I want to win a premiership in that jersey\". He told YKTR Sports podcast he found the Roosters' approach to be \"mind-blowing\". Smith was wined and dined by two Roosters powerbrokers, coach Trent Robinson and club games record-holder Mitch Aubusson. \"He pretty much persuaded me with his words,\" he said of Robinson, after being invited to make pizza at his family home. Smith, 25, took to social media earlier on Tuesday saying he didn't mean to disrespect the Storm, used his Instagram account to apologise to anyone \"hurt by my words\". \"It was never my intent to disrespect or come across as ungrateful to the club that has done so much for me and my family,\" Smith wrote. \"And that goes for my coaches, members, staff and most of all my teammates. \"I speak from the heart, for better or worse sometimes.\" In his statement, Rodski said: \"Recent comments made by Brandon in a podcast, and the way he expressed them, do not align with Storm's values and the way we operate as a club.  \"The statements have deeply offended current and former players, coaches, staff and board members and the club strongly rejects the comments made about the Storm culture. \"We acknowledge Brandon's apology made on social media today and his willingness now to prepare for the 2022 season with Storm.\" Melbourne's Brandon Smith says he was\" blown away\" by the Sydney Roosters and has made a call on his future but will first meet with Storm coach Craig Bellamy. In an hour-long interview, Smith also spoke about the Melbourne players cultivating a drinking culture that bonded the group. However, he said on social media that his words were taken out of context. \"I specifically also want to address the media honing in on my comments around the Storm culture and it being framed as a \"drinking culture\" they have going on down there,\" Smith wrote. \"Our culture is built on hard work and effort as the main priorities. These comments have been taken way out of context.\" Smith is due to return to Melbourne training on December 7 and said he was committed to the Storm for 2022. Already set to miss round one and fined for his post-grand final antics when he was photographed partying in a hotel room with white powder present, Smith could find himself in further trouble with the NRL's integrity unit set to review his podcast interview. The hooker could be fined up to $10,000 for the foul language he used on the podcast. The 56-minute interview included Smith saying the words f*** and c*** on several occasions, which is reportedly enough to warrant a breach of contract notice for bringing the game into disrepute. The NRL CEO Andrew Abdo says the integrity unit will provide him with a report on the investigation findings \"in the next 24 hours\".  "}, "/news/2021-11-30/lionel-messi-wins-seventh-ballon-dor-sam-kerr-third-womens-award/100660406": {"description": "Australian votes revealed as Lionel Messi claims seventh Ballon d'Or, Sam Kerr third in women's award", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Argentine superstar Lionel Messi has won the prestigious Ballon d'Or award for the seventh time, beating German striker Robert Lewandowski in the poll for the men's world footballer of the year. Messi spent most of the season at Barcelona, before moving to French club Paris Saint-Germain in August. He beat Bayern Munich's Robert Lewandowski and Chelsea's Jorginho. Messi broke Pele's record of most goals for one club (672 at Barcelona), and went past Gerd Muller's record of scoring at least 30 goals in 12 consecutive seasons. The superstar striker also had a breakthrough title at international level, leading Argentina to beat Brazil in the Copa America final. That award — which was announced at a ceremony in Paris — was not held last year due to COVID-19 restrictions. Lewandowski had the consolation of winning the new category of Striker of the Year, while Barcelona's Pedri took out the Kopa award for best young player. In the women's Ballon d'Or, Matildas striker Sam Kerr — who plays for Chelsea in the Women's Super League — came third in the voting, behind Barcelona's Jennifer Hermoso and her teammate and award winner Alexia Putellas.   For the third time since being first asked to do it in 2018, it was a huge privilege to again cast Australia's vote for the prestigious men's Ballon d'Or award in what was a welcome return for football's highest individual honour after it went unawarded last year for obvious reasons. Yet again, it was an incredibly hard decision to structure the 1-5 votes for the calendar year of 2021 — up to October 24 — based on the criteria set by France Football magazine, who established the award back in 1956. Those criteria are: 1. Individual and team performance 2. Talent and sportsmanship of the player 3. The player's overall career. With the European Championships and Copa America both held during the transpiring 12 months, those international tournaments were always going to carry a large amount of weight, as they always do, along with the monitoring of performances in close detail over the year. It was a comforting feeling selecting four of the eventual top five, although I missed the eventual winner in what was a tough call. For Lionel Messi to win a seventh Ballon d'Or is quite possibly, a never to be repeated achievement. To give some insight into how Australia's vote was constructed, this is how I came to my decisions: Like, I imagine, many judges did, I wrestled with the call of Lewandowski or Messi for first choice and changed my mind several times during the voting process. At the time that the nominations were sent out, the Polish goal machine had netted a remarkable 40 times in 50 games in 2021, which included the second half of the Bundesliga season, whereby he broke Gerd Muller's long-standing single-season goal record with 41 strikes and claimed his first-ever European Golden Boot gong. Yes, he is assisted by playing in the dominant Bayern Munich outfit but that should not dilute his status as, arguably, the finest pure striker and finisher the world has seen in the past decade, which was on show as much as ever in 2021. He still did his bit for his country at the Euros too, netting an impressive three goals in two games for a Poland side that was always going to battle to make it out of the group stage. Helping sway what was a close call and opt for \"Bobby\" — in addition to yet another remarkable domestic campaign where he won a seventh straight league title with Bayern Munich — was his 2020 season, where he was likely to claim the Ballon d'Or in a canter if not for the COVID-19 disruptions. Considering a player's career is part of the criteria — despite Messi obviously having a far better one all up — I felt this was a fair call, along with the other factors outlined for both players, to edge the vote his way, along with another extraordinary year. In the quest for a seventh Ballon d'Or all up, the immortal Argentine was irrepressible yet again in a year highlighted by his first major tournament win with Argentina, the Copa America, where he claimed joint golden boot: four goals and player of the tournament honours. There was the La Liga Golden Boot as well for Messi, who still mesmerises like no other in the footballing world at his best, but that's where the major honours ended, without a league title and a Champions League campaign that ended in the round of 16 as things started to unravel at Barcelona. He would still finish fourth in the Champions League forward of the season award, one spot behind Lewandowski. All that considered, it was a marginal call for top honours between the two but a slow start to life at PSG for the 34-year-old, after 17 first team seasons at Barca, also had an impact in swaying the six votes to Lewandowski and placing Leo in second. Major titles matter and Jorginho played a critical role for both Italy and Chelsea in winning the two biggest trophies a player could collect in 2021 – the European Championships and the Champions League. Of course, simply claiming them is not enough to figure prominently in Ballon d'Or voting, the individual performances must be of an exceedingly high standard as well. That was certainly the case for the remarkably talented midfielder who demonstrated his all-encompassing engine room game as a tempo-setter, playmaker, defensive shield and elite penalty converter, en route to the two major achievements for club and country. This was highlighted by being named UEFA men's player of the year, in the Euros team of the tournament and the Champions League squad of the season. At about the halfway mark of the year, after playing an undeniable leading role in Chelsea's Champions League triumph, Kante was the red-hot favourite for the Ballon d'Or. Named as the Champions League midfielder of the season, all that was required was a strong European Championships for the world's best true defensive midfielder to feature more prominently in the votes. However, as France faltered and Kante's start to the 2021–22 season was a tad off his mind-blowing standards, he slid down the polling sheet a touch. Still, to be fourth on anyone's list — and, quite possibly, higher in some — as an out-and-out defensive midfielder, albeit one who possesses a creative passing game, is a sensational mark to reach and just reward for an incredible career to date that deserved a high-placed finish after another stunning year. Few defensive midfielders can take your breath away. Kante has done so for close to 10 years and as much as ever for Chelsea in the first part of 2021. This may raise some eyebrows after Salah elevated himself to \"best player in the world\" status over the past few months but a large chunk of that period came after the nominations were sent out to judges. Prior to that, it was hard for Salah to post a calendar year performance that would lead to a higher-vote position — in my mind anyway — as Liverpool endured one of their worst form runs in their history in the first part of 2021. Still, it would be the Egyptian king who helped the Reds through it more than anyone else and led to him being named in the PFA team of the season, with 22 goals for the campaign, second only to  Then came the insane end to the 2021 calendar year and the justifiable tag as the best player on Earth, on form. Personally, it elevated him over  Judges are also asked to vote in a 3,2,1 format for the Lev Yashin award for the best goalkeeper of the year, in honour of the Russian great.    "}, "/news/2021-11-29/supercars-championship-jamie-whincup-to-bow-out-at-bathurst-1000/100659966": {"description": "Whincup to adopt trademark 'win it or bin it' attitude in Bathurst 1000 farewell", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " This weekend's Bathurst 1000 will be Jamie Whincup's last hurrah as a Supercars driver, drawing to a close one of the most successful careers in the sport.  The 38-year-old has earned legend status in Supercars, having claimed a record seven championships, four Bathurst 1000 victories and 124 race wins. Whincup said he was confident he could conquer the Bathurst 1000's treacherous Mount Panorama Circuit one more time on Sunday. \"This weekend we've got as good an opportunity as ever,\" he said. \"I wouldn't be here if we didn't have a chance [to win]. We've just got to be there at the end of six-and-a-half hours. \"It'll be the same 'win it or bin it Jamie' that you've seen over the last 10 years.  \"I certainly don't want to be left in the middle of the pack.\" Whincup is in a league of his own, sitting ahead of five-time Supercars/Australian Touring Car championship winners Mark Skaife, Dick Johnson and Ian Geoghegan. His title victories came in 2008, 2009, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 — the year he claimed the all-time pole position award and a record-breaking sixth championship win — and most recently in 2017. \"When I made the decision I wanted to retire, I wanted to make sure I finished at my peak and my most competitive,\" Whincup said. \"Sydney Motorsport Park showed that and the same goes for this weekend. We are going to fight it out and I won't be handing it over to anyone.\" During his almost two decades in Supercars, Whincup has not attracted the praise or cult-like worship that some of his competitors have enjoyed, such as Skaife, Craig Lowndes or Peter Brock. That could come down to the fact that he has won championships in both a Ford and a Holden, in addition to his brash and uncompromising style on the track. Either way, Whincup relished the hostility and said he hoped he copped as much heat in his farewell race as he had during his accomplished career. \"I love the passion of this place (Mount Panorama), it's a crazy place and we love to come here racing,\" he said. \"We need both sides, the rivalry and the passion. I don't want that to stop. \"I certainly hope the beloved Ford fans and the haters are still there, that's what makes Bathurst Bathurst.\" Whether you're a fan or not, Whincup has to be appreciated for his achievements and unyielding approach to racing. \"I don't regret anything, anyone can put on their captain hindsight hat,\" he said. \"But standing here right now I feel it is time [to retire] and I am looking forward to my last event.\" As a seven-year-old, Whincup test drove his first go-kart In 1991, before notching up junior and rookie titles as a teenager. He won the Senior Formula A Kart Series at age 15 and the Australian Formula Ford Championship as a 19-year-old. Whincup's Supercars debut came in 2002 and he graduated to become a full-time driver the following year, but was dumped a short time later. When he was given a career lifeline by Tasman Motorsport in 2005, he was not going to let this opportunity slide and he finished on the podium at the Sandown 500 and the Bathurst 1000. Those successes caught the attention of Triple Eight Race Engineering and the rest is history. Racing on the Mount Panorama circuit is the ideal send-off for Whincup. \"I normally like to keep it low key at the start of Bathurst week,\" he said. \"But I am just blown away by how much effort the team has put into my last week. They're making it very special for me, I'm proud as punch. \"Win, lose or draw, I am going to try and enjoy it as much as I can. I feel very privileged. \"To have one (Bathurst win) would have been enough for me, but to have four is an amazing feeling.\" While Whincup is stepping out of the full-time driver seat, he is not saying goodbye to the sport. The 38-year-old is joining Triple Eight's team management. \"I am looking forward to what I call chapter three [of my career], which is going to be just as exciting as chapter two,\" he said. For the first time in history Bathurst 1000 will conclude this year's Supercars championship, after Covid-19 forced changes to the original schedule."}, "/news/2021-11-29/george-kambosos-jr-world-title-to-inspire-australian-boxers/100659816": {"description": "Kambosos Jr hailed the 'Michael Jordan' of Australian boxing after world title victory", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " George Kambosos Jr's stunning win over Teófimo López in New York has raised hopes Australian boxing is about to enter a golden era. Kambosos Jr's split decision victory to claim the IBF, WBA and WBO lightweight titles testing himself against Japan's Takeshi Inoue earlier this month Cruiserweight Jai Opetaia is set to fight Latvia's Mairis Briedis for the IBF title in the new year, while much is expected of heavyweight Justis Huni. who won Australia's first Olympic boxing medal in 33 years with his bronze in Tokyo George Kambosos Jr’s stunning win over Teófimo López could lay claim to being the best ever by an Australian overseas. Garside will have his first professional bout in Sydney on December 22. He said Kambosos Jr's victory was an inspiration to young Australian boxers. \"Everyone wrote George off but he is so mentally strong and he got under López's skin,\" Garside said. \"He turned up to fight and I reckon it's one of the best boxing outcomes Australia has ever received. \"George has had to do it the hard way, but he's set the bar for every other Australian fighter. \"He's the top echelon, he's the Michael Jordan and he's come from the same places as us, he's fought on the same cards and it makes you even more motivated.\" Garside said Australian boxing needed to make the most of the exposure created by Kambosos Jr's win in the United States. \"It's got to be one of the most exciting boxing eras,\" he said. \"You've got the Moloney twins making waves, Justis is exceptional too and this is just the start of it, because the likes of Tim (Tszyu) and George are still young. \"I'm not putting myself in that category yet, but I hope in a few years I can be.\" Lightweight Garside will take on Fijian southpaw Sachin Mudaliar (9-1) next month, with the fight on the undercard for the bout between former NRL players Paul Gallen and Darcy Lussick.  "}, "/news/2021-11-29/novak-djokovic-likely-to-skip-australian-open-over-covid-vaccine/100659384": {"description": "Novak Djokovic's dad claims his son will likely skip Australian Open over vaccine mandate", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Novak Djokovic's father says his son is unlikely to play at the Australian Open if rules on COVID-19 vaccinations are not relaxed. all players must be vaccinated against COVID-19 if they want to compete at the tournament in January Novak Djokovic has so far declined to disclose whether he is vaccinated. His father, Srdjan, told Serbia's TV Prva that Tennis Australia's stance on players being vaccinated was tantamount to \"blackmail\". \"As far as vaccines and non-vaccines are concerned, it is the personal right of each of us whether we will be vaccinated or not,\" he was quoted as saying on news website B92. \"No-one has the right to enter into our intimacy. \"Under these blackmails and conditions, [Novak Djokovic] probably won't [play]. I wouldn't do that. And he's my son, so you decide for yourself.\" Tournament director Craig Tiley ends speculation over next year's Australian Open, confirming all players — including world number one Novak Djokovic — must be vaccinated to play at Melbourne Park. \"We'll see. We'll have to wait and see,\" Djokovic said at the ATP Finals in Turin. \"I haven't been talking to them (Australian Open organisers), to be honest,\" he added. \"I was just waiting to hear what the news is going to be and now that I know we'll just have to wait and see.\" including this year's tournament He shares the record of 20 men's major singles titles with Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal. Federer will miss the tournament as he recovers from another knee surgery The Australian Open begins on January 17.  "}, "/news/2021-11-29/josh-inglis-happy-with-his-game-ahead-of-possible-test-debut/100658284": {"description": "Josh Inglis happy with his game ahead of possible Test debut", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The man who could be Australia's next Test wicketkeeper, Josh Inglis, has credited his work with a sports psychologist for the improvement that has put him in the mix for selection. Inglis told reporters on Monday that while he wasn't sure when selectors would make their call on the first Test line-up — including the identity of the keeper to replace Tim Paine — he expected something to happen \"in the next day or two\". Inglis and the Redbacks' Alex Carey were both named in an extended players list when the Ashes squad was announced. Since then, Paine has taken a leave of absence from cricket for personal reasons after his departure from the Australian captaincy. This leaves a vacancy behind the stumps, with Inglis and Carey in line. \"It (last season) was the first really consistent season I've had — it's quite crazy to think how far I've come in a short space of time,\" he said. Inglis is happy to acknowledge that his time with a sports psychologist has been very beneficial, and helped put him in line for a possible Test debut at the Gabba. \"I've done a lot of work with the psychologist (Cricket Australia's Matt Burgin) and (batting coach) Beau Casson,\" he said. Inglis said he had been making starts and the odd 50 but not going on with it, before working to sharpen his focus while batting.  \"I just really narrowed down my focus and my routines...my goal was to face more balls, prolonging my innings and scoring a few hundreds. \"It's really exciting, I'm feeling confident about my game at the moment, so given the opportunity I feel like I'd do a good job (for Australia).\" The Western Australian made his first T20 century for Leicestershire in England's T20 Blast in June. Inglis has not had much red-ball cricket recently — he spent a month with Australia's winning T20 World Cup squad in the UAE, wrapping up a fortnight ago, without cracking the team, but he has still maintained his mental discipline even in quarantine. \"That's the beauty of it. I can replicate what I'm doing in training and in games,\" Inglis said. \"It's not something that just comes out during a Shield game or an A game or whatever. Carey has had a number of Sheffield Shield matches for South Australia, taking a number of catches but with a string of scores of less than 10, before making 101 in the domestic One-Day Cup against Queensland. The last chance to influence selectors' thinking — a three-day internal match at Redlands from Wednesday — could well fall victim to Queensland's run of wet weather, given predictions of up to 70mm of rainfall on Tuesday ahead of the game. Born in Leeds, the 26-year-old Inglis came to Australia as a teenager. His first Ashes memories are of staying up late or getting up early in the morning British time with his dad to watch the 2001 series, and seeing \"JL and Haydos (Matthew Hayden)\" batting, the latter making a big hundred. Now, it maybe that within days JL — Justin Langer — may be coaching him in an Ashes series. \"Ever since then, Ashes series have been huge, it's probably the pinnacle of the sport and every series there are so many big moments,\" he said. He acknowledged that as a kid he had supported England, but that had changed once he got into the Australian cricket state system.     \"Once you start batting your way up in professional cricket, it's pretty tough trying to play for a country (Australia) if you don't support them,\" he said. Asked to name his cricketing idols when growing up in Britain, the hard-hitting batsmen pointed to a kindred spirit in the English line-up. \"To watch KP (Kevin Pietersen) bat — the flair he played with, how aggressive he was, the way he took the game on in red and white ball cricket, he was the one (I looked to),\" Inglis said. He says his Australian teammates haven't been going too hard on him and his background, but he acknowledges his family may be slightly conflicted if he gets picked for Australia. \"They'll be really proud and happy for me if I get there ... there may be a bit of banter thrown (around at) the dinner table!\""}, "/news/2021-11-29/boston-celtics-enes-kanter-changing-surname-to-freedom/100658320": {"description": "Boston Celtics' Enes Kanter changing surname to Freedom", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Boston Celtics centre Enes Kanter is changing his name to \"Enes Kanter Freedom\" to celebrate becoming a United States citizen. Kanter's manager, Hank Fetic, told The Associated Press that Kanter will have his citizenship oath ceremony on Monday afternoon and, at the same time, will complete his legal name change. Kanter, 29, is a native of Turkey who has been an outspoken critic of President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and the Turkish government. He has said his passport was revoked by his homeland in 2017. The 2011 first-round draft pick has also taken to social media to support Tibetan independence and criticise Chinese treatment of the Uyghur people. During games, he has worn shoes decorated to say \"Free Tibet\" and has argued for a boycott of the 2022 Beijing Olympics. The news of a name change was first reported by the Athletic. More to come.  "}, "/news/2021-11-29/in-demand-smith-blown-away-by-roosters/100658112": {"description": "In-demand Brandon Smith 'blown away' by Roosters", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Melbourne NRL star Brandon Smith has had his head turned by the Sydney Roosters, admitting he looked at their famous jumper during a meeting and thought: \"I want to win a premiership in that jersey\". A free agent for 2023, Smith says he's made a decision on his NRL future but will meet with Storm coach Craig Bellamy before making it public. \"I've made up my mind,\" Smith told YKTR Sports podcast. \"I've still got a meeting with the Storm and Craig [Bellamy] is pretty persuading as well.\" He said he was blown away by the Roosters powerbrokers, coach Trent Robinson and club games record-holder Mitch Aubusson. The 25-year-old has been courted by newcomers The Dolphins, Gold Coast and said that Penrith, Wests Tigers and Parramatta had also shown interest. But he was particularly taken by the Roosters after being invited to Robinson's house and making pizza with his French wife and family. \"The thing that really gets me is his love for culture — like, Aboriginal culture, Maori culture, Samoan culture, Tongan culture. \"He can talk about it. He knows so much stuff about it. Reads books on all those things. And that to me is special because obviously I am a proud Maori man … for him to be like that is awesome. \"He pretty much persuaded me with his words.\" Smith played golf with Kiwi Test teammate, Jared Waerea-Hargreaves, and former Rooster stars Aubusson and Jake Friend and lunched with heavy-hitter Mark Bouris. \"Mitchy Aubo almost made me cry,\" Smith said. \"How he spoke about the club and what they've done for him and the history of why they wear that jersey and why we play the way we do. \"Back in the '20s, Bondi wasn't what we see today. That's what he was talking about. It pretty much wanted to make you cry. \"I was just looking at the Roosters jersey as he was saying it and I had goosebumps. I was looking at it going, 'I want to win a premiership in that jersey'.\" He said he felt the Roosters were well positioned to set players up for life post-NRL. \"They want you to be set for life — they don't want you to walk away with nothing from rugby league. \"They just pushed that. They can tell you how they are going to help you with life … it was just mind-blowing.\"  "}, "/news/2021-11-29/manchester-united-draw-chelsea-tottenham-postponed/100657942": {"description": "Manchester United draw with leaders Chelsea, Tottenham frozen out", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Manchester United have steadied the ship that saw former coach Ole Gunnar Solskjaer sacked last week, drawing with English Premier League leaders Chelsea overnight. The result comes just days after the appointment of German innovator Ralph Rangnick in an interim role, but it was Solskjaer's former assistant, Michael Carrick, who led United against the Blues while Rangnick waits for a work permit. Chelsea came into the clash off a thumping of Juventus in the Champions League, while the Red Devils fielded a surprising side containing three defensive midfielders while talisman striker Cristiano Ronaldo was left on the bench, a decision that caused heated debate among players-turned-pundits post-match. It was a timely meeting between the two sides. Many credit Rangnick for Chelsea boss Thomas Tuchel's innovative approach to the game, an approach that has seen Chelsea crowned both FA Cup and Champions League winners since Tuchel took over in January. Rangnick reportedly rejected an interim head coach offer from the Blues before Tuchel's appointment. True to their player selection, United played largely defensively, trying to neutralise Chelsea's blistering attack, while attempting to score on the counter. United's tactical approach worked, with England international Jadon Sancho — who got the nod to start ahead of Ronaldo — capitalising on a horror individual error from Chelsea midfielder Jorginho just after the break. However, Jorginho would atone for his sinful ball control, slotting home a penalty in the 69th minute after United defender Aaron Wan-Bissaka took out Chelsea defender Thiago Silva in the box. Ronaldo took to the field in the 64th minute, replacing the goal-scorer Sancho, earning a yellow card a few minutes later for arguing with the referee about the penalty decision. The draw didn't do much for either side, with United still sitting 8th on the table — equal on points with Brighton and Leicester — while Chelsea are clinging onto their league lead by a single point ahead of Manchester City. Liverpool — who thumped Southampton 4-0 on Sunday morning — are one point behind City in third, while West Ham and Arsenal round out the top five. Elsewhere in the league, newcomers Brentford recorded their second win at home in their first ever Premier League season, defeating Everton 1-0. Striker Ivan Toney scored his first goal in front of home fans, stepping up to convert a penalty in the 24th minute. Everton, meanwhile, continue to stumble through the first half of the season: Their result against Brentford makes it five losses and two draws in their past seven games. They next take on local rivals, Liverpool, in the Merseyside Derby next weekend. Tottenham will have their game against Burnley rescheduled after heavy snow forced a late postponement, a little under an hour before kick-off away at Turf Moor. The date and location of the rescheduled match is yet to be announced. Spurs, currently in 7th, are in need of some good fortune following their humiliating 2-1 defeat to Slovenian minnows NS Mura in the Europa Conference League last week. It was the first loss under new head coach Antonio Conte, who took over from the sacked Nuno Espirito Santo earlier this month. Here are the results across the rest of the league this weekend:            "}, "/news/2021-11-29/steph-kyriacou-ends-let-season-with-112-000-present/100657744": {"description": "Steph Kyriacou ends LET season with $112,000 present", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Rising Australian golf star Steph Kyriacou has ended her Ladies European Tour season by banking a 70,000 euro ($112,000) windfall — the perfect late birthday present before she undertakes a marathon journey to the US in a bid to earn her card on the LPGA Tour. Kyriacou won a 50,000 euro bonus for finishing third in the Tour's season-long Order of Merit following a joint-fifth finish on Sunday at the concluding Andalucia Costa del Sol Open de Espana, which also earned her another 20,000 euros. It was a welcome present for the player who turned 21 in the week and who is now hoping to come of age as a golfer on both sides of the Atlantic when she flies to Alabama this week in a bid to earn her card at the LPGA qualifying series. Kyriacou, who is now up to 77 in the world rankings, earned an invite to the LPGA's Q-Series at the Robert Trent Jones Golf Trail by finishing as one of the top five in the LET's season-long Race to Costa del Sol. On Sunday, she shot a final three-under-par round of 69 at the Marbella event which took her to equal-fifth place on five-under, 10 shots behind the tournament winner, Spain's Carlota Ciganda. Ciganda delighted the home crowd as she cruised to victory on her 15-under total, four shots clear of Sweden's Maja Stark, who returned a 66 and seven ahead of third-placed Atthaya Thitikul, who shot a closing 71. Kyriacou's tenth top-10 finish of the season, which included her second tournament win in the Netherlands in July, ensured she leapfrogged Finland's Sanna Nuutinen into third in the season-long Race, triggering the 50,000 Euros bonus. \"I'm happy I played well and got third, also happy I have the opportunity to go to the States and try to get on the LPGA Tour,\" said Kyriacou, who spent some of this season and all of last travelling with her father who acted as her caddie. \"It has been a good year but I can't wait then to go home.\" Kyriacou, who won LET Rookie of the Year in 2020, has maintained her progress, saying: \"I think my putting has been key. I have been working on that and tried to stay on top of it and my wedge game as well. \"I went through a rough patch in the middle of the year with my hitting and long game, so I need to keep on top of that.\" Now there is one more big quest for her as she has to take three flights from Spain, via Paris and Atlanta, to get to Alabama for the Q-Series. \"It is going to be a quick turnaround with getting over the jet lag, but the important thing is I have the opportunity,\" she said. \"It will help having Jeeno (Thailand's 18-year-old phenomenon Thitikul, the runaway winner of the Race to Costa del Sol) there with me too because it will be nice to have someone that I know there. \"If I got status on both tours, I would probably do a bit of both — it depends on which tournaments clash with what. We will figure that out when the time comes.\"  "}, "/news/2021-11-29/f1-great-sir-frank-williams-founder-of-williams-racing-dies-79/100657556": {"description": "F1 great Sir Frank Williams, founder of Williams Racing, dies at 79", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Sir Frank Williams, the founder and former team principal of Williams Racing, has died. He was 79. Sir Frank took his motor racing team from an empty carpet warehouse to the summit of Formula 1, overseeing 114 victories, a combined 16 drivers' and constructors' world championships, while becoming the longest-serving team boss in the sport's history. \"After being admitted into hospital on Friday, Sir Frank passed away peacefully this morning surrounded by his family,\" Williams Racing said in a statement. Williams driver George Russell remembered Sir Frank as a \"genuinely wonderful human being\". Sir Frank's life was all the more extraordinary because of the horrific car crash he suffered in France that left him with injuries so devastating doctors considered turning off his life-support machine. But his wife Virginia ordered that her husband be kept alive and his sheer determination and courage — characteristics that personified his career — enabled him to continue with the love of his life, albeit from the confines of a wheelchair. He would remain in his role as Williams team principal for a further 34 years before F1's greatest family team was sold to an American investment group in August. Francis Owen Garbett Williams was born in South Shields on April 16, 1942 to an RAF officer and a headmistress. He was educated at St Joseph's College, a private boarding school in Dumfries where he became obsessed with cars following a ride in a Jaguar XK150. A travelling salesman by day, Sir Frank fulfilled his racing ambitions at the weekend and, aged just 24, he launched his own team, Frank Williams Racing Cars. Four years later, they were competing in Formula Two, and with flatmate and closest friend Piers Courage behind the wheel, Williams graduated to F1 in 1969 using a second-hand Brabham. But tragedy struck at the 1970 Dutch Grand Prix. Courage ran off the track, one of his front wheels hit his helmet, and his car burst into flames. Courage's grizzly death in a car bearing the Williams name left Sir Frank devastated. Broke and with spiralling debts, he reluctantly sold 60 per cent of his team to Walter Wolf in 1975. But Sir Frank was not made to be a back-seat driver and, desperate for independence, he severed ties with the Canadian businessman. He set up shop at an old carpet warehouse in Didcot, Oxfordshire and signed a promising young engineer named Patrick Head. The double act would go on to make grand prix history. With Saudi Arabian funding and the hiring of Australian driver Alan Jones, Williams Grand Prix Engineering became a force. At the 1979 British Grand Prix, Jones registered Williams' first pole position before teammate Clay Regazzoni took the team's maiden win a day later. In 1980, Jones delivered Williams their first title. The team also won back-to-back constructors' championships, while Keke Rosberg was crowned drivers' champion in 1982. But, in 1986, Sir Frank's life would change forever. Following a test at the Paul Ricard circuit in March, Sir Frank set off on a 157km dash to Nice Airport in a rented Ford Sierra. Travelling through the windy roads at speed, Sir Frank lost control and the car ended up on its roof following a 2.5 metre drop into a field. His passenger, the team's marketing manager Peter Windsor, escaped with minor injuries. But Sir Frank suffered a spinal fracture that would leave him in a wheelchair for the rest of his life. \"I was late for a plane which I didn't need to be late for because I got the French time mixed up with the English time,\" Sir Frank later said. \"The roads were very bumpy, the hire car was not the world's best, and suddenly I was off the road upside down and with a broken neck. \"It was very unfair on my family, particularly my wife, because of how my circumstances changed. In hindsight, it was a careless and a selfish thing to have done.\" Despite his life-changing injuries, Sir Frank was back at the helm of his team within nine months. Over the ensuing 11 years, five further drivers' championships — including those for Nigel Mansell and Damon Hill — as well as seven constructors' titles, followed. But there would be more heartache for Sir Frank when Ayrton Senna was killed in just his third race for the British team at the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix. Sir Frank was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 1999 but his team was never able to replicate its heyday of the 1980s and 1990s. He stepped back in 2013, the year in which his wife died, allowing his daughter Claire to assume the day-to-day running of the team. Sir  Frank fought off pneumonia in 2016, but he has been an irregular fixture in the paddock for a number of years. And, at the Italian Grand Prix in Monza, an historic sporting chapter was closed when the Williams family contested its 739th and concluding race after selling up to Dorilton Capital. Sir Frank is survived by his three children, sons Jonathan and Jamie and Claire, and grandchildren Ralph and Nathaniel.  "}, "/news/2021-11-29/george-kambosos-jr-lightweight-world-title-victory-best-overseas/100657412": {"description": "By dethroning a would-be king, George Kambosos Jr sits atop Australian boxing", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " his stunning split-decision victory \"I'm the greatest Australian fighter in history,\" he said. Australian boxer George Kambosos Jr has defeated Teófimo López in a monumental upset to become the world unified lightweight champion. Follow all the action in our live blog. That audacious claim is yet to be confirmed, but one thing is certain: Kambosos delivered the most seismic upset in a boxing ring in 2021. the nine-month frustration caused by video-sharing app Triller's pie-in-the-sky bid to host the contest Rewind 12 months and López was the talk of the boxing world. The number-two-ranked pound-for-pound fighter combined phenomenal power and speed with a brash personality, and equally brash father, that American audiences just lapped up. After stunning Vasiliy Lomachenko, López stood atop a mouth-watering lightweight division that featured a group of young fighters some had already crowned the next four kings with Ryan García, Devin Haney and Gervonta Davis. The inactivity of the last year — caused by a COVID-positive test result and the Triller debacle — halted that momentum, but nobody seriously considered an upset of the scale Kambosos delivered, dethroning one would-be king by declaring himself \"emperor\". Through 12 pulsating rounds of boxing in which Kambosos out-foxed the lion in his own den in a tremendous contest, nobody could doubt Kambosos had done enough. The Australian landed the cleaner punches by far, delivering superbly-timed double-jabs and a bruising overhand right that bewildered López to the point of distraction — although the startlingly mixed messages coming from the American's corner could not have helped either. Even the vocal home crowd agreed. So hostile to the Aussie pre-contest, before he stunningly silenced them with that scene-setting first-round knockdown, they booed as López ill-advisedly hijacked Kambosos's in-ring interview with delusional claims of robbery. López claimed in that diatribe that he was \"a true champion … not a sore loser\" but his swollen, bloodied eyes told the true story, wildly staring as they were into a now-uncertain future. It will go down as a split decision, but most pundits gave Kambosos the win on their cards, with only López and judge Don Trella demurring to the accepted view that a new unified champion had been crowned. \"I'm an unbelievable boxer,\" Kambosos said in the ring, following the fight. \"They can't believe how good I box. My defence, my movement. [I'm] too sharp, too fast, too strong. \"My conditioning and my stamina were unbelievable.\" Many will add Kambosos's resilience to that list. Although he had stunned López with a knockdown courtesy of beautiful overhand right in the first, many imagined that would merely be a hiccup on the way to a knockout victory for the noticeably larger American. However, Kambosos boxed brilliantly, mixing hugely intelligent ring craft with enough smack-talk to make an Ashes cricketer blush. That belligerent taunting at the end of every round infuriated López, keeping him in a state of constant aggression that worked almost perfectly until Kambosos got too cocky, going down in the 10th. \"I was trying to entertain the fans too much,\" said Kambosos, who even indulged in a spot of showboating in the sixth. \"I got excited too much, I got caught. But you know what? What a warrior. \"I got back up against all odds and still finished the fight and won the next round.\"  Lionel Rose Fans of Kostya Tszyu may have something to say about that, his stunning win over Zab Judah at the MGM Grand in 2001 a certain contender. That victory gave Tszyu senior the undisputed light welterweight championship. Kambosos now has three of the four lightweight belts in his locker — not including the gaudy, much-disputed WBC Franchise belt That means Kambosos is not undisputed champion, not yet at least. Devin Haney holds the regular WBC belt, but has indicated that he wants to fight Kambosos in the new year for the undisputed title. First, Haney has to get past Joseph Diaz Jr next week in order for that fight to be attractive enough for Kambosos, who how has serious clout in the division. Davis and Garcia also loom as attractive possibilities at the 135-pound limit — with the latter already throwing his hat in the ring — and blockbuster world title fights in Australia surely a possibility. There is no doubt we are now in a rich era of Australian boxing, with the sport reaching new levels of popularity off the back of the exploits of likeable champions Jeff Horn and Tim Tszyu. But now Kambosos can justifiably lay claim to being the biggest fish in Australia's rapidly expanding pool of world-ranked stars. His next fights will determine his real legacy, but few can doubt he's made everyone sit up and take note now. As Kambosos noted after his fight, he's been the underdog throughout his career. After a performance of such quality, there will be few who make the same mistake of overlooking Kambosos again."}, "/news/2021-11-29/a-league-women-four-female-coaches-make-history/100657316": {"description": "'A female coach really understands the female game': A-League Women welcomes record number of female coaches", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " There was only one female head coach in the W-League last year, but that number has risen for the new-look A-League Women season. This year, four out of 10 A-League Women head coaches are female — the highest number of female coaches in the league's 13-year history. The women in charge include Ash Wilson (Newcastle Jets), Catherine Cannuli (Western Sydney Wanderers), Gemma Lewis (Wellington Phoenix) and Vicki Linton, who took on the head coaching position at Canberra United last season. For Wilson it was a long road top job, having served a five-year apprenticeship as an assistant coach. \"To go through all of the training and assistant work to get here shows a real commitment to the trade; I am really excited,\" Wilson said. \"It's great the clubs are recognising the value and the contributions of some of these coaches. \"To see more females stepping up is great, but for me it's not a female or male thing, it's who's the right coach for the job.\" Jets player Hannah Brewer is about to clock up her 100th club game but has never played under a female head coach. \"A female coach really understands the female game,\" the veteran defender said. \"They understand everything that comes along with being an athlete and being a female, and work and family commitments.\" Having played in the league since the inaugural year of 2008, Brewer is pleased to see how the game's opportunities are changing for women. \"I couldn't speak any higher of Ash, she's is a great person on and off the field, she knows us girls and takes the time to get to know us as people and as footballers, which is not something all coaches do,\" Brewer said. \"Ash really deserves where she is going with her career.\" Lewis, coach of this year's newcomers the Wellington Phoenix, has also had to work hard to earn her stripes. \"I have been coaching for the past eight years in New Zealand, I've worked with the national team Auckland and Northern, on the international stage with the under 20's and under 17's and assisted the Football Ferns for the World Cup,\" Lewis said. \"The more we can demonstrate that females are more than capable at that level, that will show others and mean [more] female coaches coming through the pathways.\" \"Getting more females is about visibility ... coaches are now thinking, 'is this sustainable and something I can make a career out of?' \"We can break down those barriers and show if you've gone through that training, you've got your badges, you will be given that opportunity.\" In a bid to make the game more gender-equal, this year's top-flight men's and women's football competitions have been rebranded as A-League Men and A-League Women. While progress is being made, the semi-professional nature of women's football is still a juggling act for women. Most of the players in Australia's elite competition have to balance full-time or part-time work or study commitments. On top of coaching the Jets, Wilson is also a full-time teacher at Hunter Sports High School. \"During the week I'll get to school around seven, teach all day, head straight to training after work, come home from training and spend the night planning the next session,\" the physical education teacher said. Australia's top-tier men's and women's football leagues, the A-League and W-League, have been collectively rebranded as the A-Leagues ahead of the upcoming seasons. \"A typical weekend is mixed with planning, football, marking [school work]. \"At the end of the day I love football, I love teaching – I just have to balance them both to make sure I get everything done.\" Growing up, Wilson dreamed of making it as a footballer and came close making her national league debut at 15. \"I could choose an occupation that was going to make me some money – I didn't have that opportunity through football,\" Wilson said. \"I made the very hard decision to step back from the top level and there are times I regret it, but my passion for football has allowed me to work at the highest level again with talented athletes (as coach).\" Wilson applauds the growth of female football but believes there is still room for improvement. \"The commitment to continue to mentor female coaches and give them opportunities has been excellent,\" she said. \"But everyone can look at it now and say it still needs to be better, which it does and obviously the leagues and the players are going to continue to work and fight for those things.\" The A-League Women's season kicks off when the Wellington Phoenix and Western Sydney Wanderers go head to head on December 3. "}, "/news/2021-11-28/alex-carey-fires-one-day-hundred-for-south-australia/100657218": {"description": "Alex Carey boosts his Test debut chances with a century for SA", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Test hopeful Alex Carey has posted his second century of the one-day season before Gurinder Sandhu's hat-trick helped Queensland bowl out South Australia for 274 in their one-day clash. Carey started slowly, scoring just one run off his first 13 balls faced, but exploded later and belted 15 boundaries to finish with 101 off 93 at Adelaide Oval on Sunday. The powerful wicketkeeper, who is in the mix to replace former Test captain Tim Paine in Australia's Ashes line-up, blasted a huge slog-sweep six off Marnus Labuschagne. He was eventually out bowled by the part-time leg-spinner when attempting to cut a delivery that wasn't quite as short as he had expected. Carey combined with one-day debutant Henry Hunt (61) for a record-breaking 159-run opening stand for SA against Queensland. Hunt was a last-minute call-up when the Redbacks' top run-scorer Jake Weatherald failed a mandatory concussion test after a mishap while batting in the nets on Saturday. Hunt showed intent early and cut a boundary off his first ball faced but was eventually out caught at mid-wicket off Sandhu. The right-arm seamer also had Thomas Kelly and Nathan McSweeney caught in the 45th over and completed his second one-day hat-trick when he bowled Nathan McAndrew in the 47th over. Sandhu finished with 4-44 from his nine overs, with Matt Kuhnemann (3-54, nine overs) also impressing as six wickets fell in the final six overs. Like Carey, Travis Head was hoping to impress national selectors, but he was dropped twice before his luck ran out on 29, caught by Mark Steketee off Kuhnemann. Carey has represented Australia at ODI and T20 levels but is yet to make a Test debut.   "}, "/news/2021-11-28/australia-out-of-davis-cup-despite-win/100657088": {"description": "Australia out of Davis Cup despite win", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Australia's hopes of making the knockout stages at the Davis Cup finals are doomed despite a courageous Alex de Minaur-inspired 2-1 victory over Hungary in Turin. Lleyton Hewitt's side came from behind after a shock defeat for John Millman to earn the victory on Saturday that was their minimum requirement following their calamitous 3-0 loss to Croatia in their opening Group D tie on Thursday. Yet, with the Croats set to wrap up the group victory on Sunday by beating Hungary, the Australians' record of two rubbers won and four lost won't be enough to earn them a place in the quarter-finals, even as one of the two best group runners-up. Hewitt accepted they'd be flying home but reckoned he was \"extremely proud\" of their fighting spirit. \"I guess we had a couple of days to think about it and all our focus was on today and what we could control in our destiny,\" he said. \"We did that by getting the win, but it probably won't be enough to get us through.\" Qualification always looked unlikely but nobody evidently told the never-say-die de Minaur as he pulled off a marathon victory that Hewitt described as a \"great effort\". Australia's gutsy number one dug deep over three exhausting hours to prevail 7-5 2-6 7-6 (7-2) against his big-hitting Hungarian counterpart Marton Fucsovics. His win enabled the experienced John Peers and debutant Alex Bolt to then seal the tie in the decisive doubles, as they proved just a little too strong for the returning Piros and Fabian Marozsan, winning 6-3 6-7 (11-13) 6-3 in just over two hours. Millman's capitulation against long-odds outsider Zsombor Piros 4-6 6-4 6-3 meant Australia's hopes of a last-eight spot already looked shot when de Minaur took to the court. But the 22-year-old Sydneysider looked Hewitt-like in his scurrying determination to ensure they didn't leave Turin empty-handed, fulfilling his promise to \"leave everything out there\" on the Pala Alpitour court. \"You leave it all out there for your country, no matter what, and at the end of your match, you've got to be proud of your effort,\" de Minaur said after earning his first win of the week at the third attempt. \"It was a brutal battle.\" Earlier, just as Croatia's world number 276 Borna Gojo had beaten Alexei Popyrin on Thursday, a little-known Hungarian Piros, ranked 282 globally, raised his game in a manner that seemed beyond a flat-looking Millman. The 32-year-old Queenslander had been drafted in to replace Popyrin but could never find his stride as Piros, 10 years his junior, earned the biggest win of his career to date."}, "/news/2021-11-28/teofimo-lopez-vs-george-kambosos-jr-updates-boxing-blog/100655884": {"description": "Aussie George Kambosos Jr crowned world unified lightweight champion after defeating Teófimo López ", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Australian boxer George Kambosos Jr has stunned Teófimo López in a monumental upset to become the unified world lightweight champion. The three judges had it 115-111 and 115-112 in favour of Kambosos Jr, while the other had it 114-113 for López. Kambosos Jr's record moves to 20-0, while López (16-1) suffered his first professional defeat. The 28-year-old, who had bemoaned the lack of coverage coming his way prior to the fight, should now be able to command far more air time after beating one of the best pound-for-pound fighters in the world to stand atop a packed lightweight division. Kambosos Jr's now holds the WBO, IBF, WBA (Super) and The Ring belts, with just Devin Haney’s WBC belt missing at the 135-pound limit. \"I am not a king, I am the Emperor,\" Kambosos said after the fight, as a bloodied and bruised López stalked around the ring in a fury. The deposed champion took his first professional defeat badly, claiming everyone knew that he'd won, to boos of derision from the sell-out crowd at the Hulu Theatre in Madison Square Garden. Those same fans, who roared home-town fighter López into the ring, had been stunned into silence in the very first round as Kambosos timed a sweet overhand right to send the defending champ to the canvas. Both fighters had been kept out the ring since late 2020 after a litany of issues with the promotional company Triller, and in that time had developed an intense dislike of each other. That seemed to impact López more, the 24-year-old flying out his corner in a whirlwind of aggression, looking for the first-round knockout he had promised pre-fight. However, Kambosos calmly met that aggression head on, timing his double jab to perfection while keeping largely out of range of López's heavy shots. López was more tentative after that early shock, stalking Kambosos Jr around the ring, but could not find his timing and was repeatedly caught by the Australian, who rejoiced in his early successes by talking at the end of each round, almost toying with his highly-rated opponent. In the sixth, Kambosos really poked the bear, landing with another overhand right and then winding up that same gloved fist, smiling mockingly at the American. In the ninth, however, López rocked the Australian with a powerful right to the chin. It was a punch that rocked Kambosos, who was sent to the ground in the tenth after another chopping right found its mark. By this time, both men's faces were bloodied messes, López having been cut over both eyes and Kambosos too bleeding from his right. If López thought that Kambosos was done after the knockdown, another left that caught the American flush at the start of the eleventh removed all doubt that the Aussie would not crack. Kambosos finished the stronger and, as both fighters celebrated victory in their corners, most knew only a savage home-town decision would deny Kambosos his place in history.   By Simon Smale Well, that was fun. George Kambosos threw more punches. He landed more punches. He got the decision away from home. The new unified lightweight champion of the world. Incredible performance. What a time for Australian boxing. Audience comment by Jonno Simon you do it so well as one previous caller said, it’s like being ringside. Thank you  Audience comment by Billy Bob great result and great 'call'. Audience comment by Stephen  Thanks for a great commentary. First rate. Well done George Kambosos By Simon Smale By Simon Smale Teófimo López says he knows he won the fight and that everyone knows he won the fight. He says he thinks he won 10 of the 12 rounds. The crowd are booing him. Kambosos calls him delusional. Have to agree. \"Take it like a champ, let's do it again in Australia,\" Kambosos says. \"80,000 fans in Australia, let's do it again.\" By Simon Smale \"I believed in myself, I backed myself. I'm not the king, I'm the emperor,\" he says. \"It was a long long camp. \"Every day I got better and better and better and better. \"It's my night tonight and it's gunna be my night for a very long time \"I'm the Emperor. \"I got myself back up, what a warrior,\". \"I'm the greatest Australian fighter in history.\" Audience comment by Burnie  Well done young man. Australia is proud. 😎 Audience comment by Isaac A new Aussie GOAT is born 🐐  By Simon Smale Is this the biggest upset victory in Australian boxing history? Of course Jeff Horn's performance at Lang Park will take some beating, but this is away from home, a hostile crowd. Wow. Let's hear from the new unified champ. Audience comment by Clifford <br>Great commentary. I feel like i was at the fight.<br> Audience comment by Chris Great blog. Thanks for feeding the fight to us! Fantastic stuff. By Simon Smale 115-111 Kambosos. 114-113 López 115-112 Kambosos! WOW! WHAT A PERFORMANCE! A split decision victory and a thoroughly deserved one! He went into the Lions den and has taken down the defending champion! By Simon Smale Audience comment by Robert I hope you are right about the points lead Simon By Simon Smale Both men are celebrating. The commentators are saying that Kambosos did enough to win. I agree. I had it 111-115. Remember though, we are in New York. By Simon Smale By Simon Smale Final round. I have Kambosos up by three. Kambosos with a dummy then a left. López lands with a right, Kambosos responds in kind. López goes to the body, Kambosos shields himself, then unloads with the left! The pair exchange a flurry of punches, but Kambosos lands with a couple of better jabs and then that left again. López with the right, Kambosos with the left!  Big right from López! Shot from Kambosos! A left to the face! This is brutal stuff! Kambosos lands with a great shot, and another shot! He is landing more host here! López lands with an upper cut, but Kambosos comes back! That's the bell! By Simon Smale What a fight this is. López still in the centre of the ring, but is caught flush by a left from Kambosos. López tries to come behind the jab, but there is no let up from Kambosos. They exchange rights. Then López lands a left. Big right from Kambosos! A shake of the head from López, but that did get him right on the face. Two lefts from Kambosos. Both men are cut, López has a lot of blood coming down the left side of his face. If fact, both men's faces are a bloody mess. Kambosos lands a couple of shots, a tremendous flurry of scoring shots. The referee calls a halt though and the referee wants to have a look at the cut... They're OK to continue, I think it was caused by a punch, so could end the fight if the referee sees it as bad enough. BIG RIGHT FROM KAMBOSOS!  López charges at him but a brilliant round from Kambosos! By Simon Smale"}, "/news/2021-11-28/wellington-phoenix-major-sponsor-womens-team/100650626": {"description": "Wellington Phoenix still without major sponsor as A-league Women's season approaches", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The Wellington Phoenix women's team will make history next Friday when they run out against the Western Sydney Wanderers in their first-ever A-League Women's game. At this stage, though, they won't have a major sponsor on the front of their jerseys. Despite being a passionate sporting country, it has taken until 2021 for New Zealand to form its first professional women's football team — outside the national team, the Football Ferns. New Zealand currently has no professional football clubs — for men or women — and the domestic National League only includes amateur women's teams. The addition of the Wellington Phoenix to the A-League Women's competition is seen as a huge milestone for women's football in New Zealand and comes in the wake of FIFA granting them co-hosting rights for the 2023 Women's World Cup. This, coupled with the meteoric growth of women's football around the world, suggests that investing in New Zealand's first women's team would be a no-brainer. However, it has been a different story on the ground. \"It has been disappointing [not signing a sponsor],\" said Phoenix Women's inaugural head coach, Gemma Lewis. \"Being the first that's ever happened, building this brand, achieving something we've waited so long for, I did think there was going to be a lot of people stepping up and wanting to be a part of it.\" Wellington's female team were given the green light to join Australia's top women's football league earlier this year, expanding the competition to ten teams. The club's sponsorship woes have not been through a lack of trying on their end. Phoenix administrators have approached banks and major corporations in the country, but none have put pen to paper. Border restrictions means the team must also play out most of their first season in Australia, away from potential home fans and sponsors. \"I think people have struggled a bit with the first New Zealand team playing in Australia [and] not being in New Zealand,\" Lewis said. \"Also the criteria of only having so many New Zealand players in this team [due to Football Australia's visa requirements]. \"That affects the sponsorship opportunities. So there's a few things that have made it slightly more complicated to get the backing behind [the team].\" Phoenix General Manager David Dome has also expressed his disappointment, having worked for the past few years to get the team up and running. \"The Phoenix have shown their investment in the female game and female pathways; not just in the game, but in administration and [at] all levels,\" he said. \"The game needs to be appreciated as something different that you don't have in the men's. It should be appreciated in its own right: how the football is played and the talent of these players.\" The women's team will be based out of Wollongong on the New South Wales south coast. Lewis says the team has been welcomed with open arms. \"We've had great support from the Wollongong community: training at the Wollongong Wolves [NPL] ground, access to a high-performance gym. They've really gotten behind us, we feel quite at home, embraced, and looked-after.\" This has been particularly helpful for the players themselves, many of whom are young and have relocated from New Zealand to participate in the four-month-long competition. They will be staying in accommodation at the University of Wollongong, which also provides facilities such as gyms and training fields. \"Being away from home, what's normal to you — your family, your friends, your routine — these are young girls, so for that to be turned upside-down has taken some adjustment,\" Lewis said. \"But they're very happy and we are lucky they are so passionate about football. They've thrown themselves into it.\" Questions remain over the border situation with New Zealand, but the Phoenix are hoping both their men's and women's teams will have an opportunity to play games in front of home fans towards the back-end of their respective seasons. Last week, it was confirmed that Sky wpuld retain the rights as the main broadcaster of the A-Leagues. The deal includes a free-to-air component that will expose New Zealand fans to selected games from the women's competition, including their opening match against the Wanderers. In addition to the Leagues' new broadcast partnership with Channel 10 and Paramount+ in Australia, it's hoped this extra visibility will boost interest and investment in women's football across New Zealand. \"It's been something that's been missing for so long,\" Lewis said. \"The younger players really struggle to see the visibility of a career pathway in football. Because a lot of our Football Ferns play overseas, they don't have the visibility of those leagues. \"Having this [team] and the competition being broadcast, now there's a tangible pathway that's been missed out on before. It's huge for the players and the next generation having role-models closer to home that they can aspire to, [and] will really help to drive the game in New Zealand.\" The first season for any new club is challenging, but Lewis is confident that they're not just making up the numbers. \"We definitely want to make some noise,\" she said. \"We want to surprise some teams and be a team that attracts players in New Zealand and fans to want to be part of the Phoenix. \"We want to shake the tree a bit; disrupt and cause some problems.\""}, "/news/2021-11-28/gold-coast-titants-culture-nrlw-season-tazmin-gray-georgia-hale/100646338": {"description": "'A comfortable and safe place': Tazmin Gray on building the Titans' NRLW team culture", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " In recent weeks, the NRL has released the draw for the 2021 Women's Premiership set to be played in 2022. After a series of postponements and cancellations, this finally gives certainty to the teams competing and allows the players and their support staff to begin preparation in earnest. With three new teams introduced into the competition, part of that preparation must be around team culture and for the new teams in particular, they have a unique chance to establish the values and standards driving their respective playing groups. For Gold Coast Titans recruit Tazmin Gray, this is an exciting opportunity, particularly given the welcome the club has given its inaugural team including access to staff, facilities and medical support. \"We haven't had much opportunity to come together as a team, but so far our interactions with the club have felt inclusive,\" Gray said. \"For us as female athletes, it doesn't feel like we have been put on the backburner; we feel like we are already part of the club.\" The Titans have recruited strongly with a mix of upcoming talent and experienced campaigners, but it's clear that for new coach Jamie Feeney, performance on the field was only one element he was considering during the recruitment phase. Georgia Hale is a Veronica White medallist and was the 2020 Young New Zealander of the year. Karina Brown has been part of the Australian Jillaroos set up since 2013 and has also been central in building two women's footy clubs in Queensland; the Burleigh Bears and Easts Tigers. These women are talented players, but also exceptional leaders in their own right. For Gray, alongside women like Hale and Brown, she recognises their important role in establishing the culture in a new team, particularly with a coach like Feeney whose approach is to work side by side with his players. \"We have some great experience and some emerging talent, despite it being a new team that has come together,\" Gray said. \"For me, I want to lead from the front and show the younger women the way not just on the field but off it too because having great people is what breeds a great team. \"As a start, we have really focused on making sure it is a comfortable and safe place for people to be who they are. \"If you can't be yourself, or don't know who you are it is really hard to work out where you stand within a group.\" Gray had a breakout 2021 season of football. Despite not having missed a game of State of Origin since the renamed series commenced in 2018, this year she was awarded with the Nellie Doherty Medal for best player on ground. Whilst Gray has always been a gifted player, her experience with the New Zealand Warriors last year taught her the importance of culture; something she may not have recognised the importance of in the past. Given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, only five of the Warriors squad made the decision to travel to Australia to compete in the NRLW in 2020. That meant that the majority of their squad had to be recruited very quickly, by their caretaker coach, Brad Donald. Donald was a positive choice given his experience coaching at a national level and his very real understanding of the challenges that women face as full time professional athletes. When the new-look Warriors came into camp, barely any of them knew each other – a challenge given they were expected to be ready to play footy together in less than a month. \"Despite having been in camps with so many of those women before, in the past I probably wouldn't have given them the time of day, but that all changed after I got to know them,\" Gray said. \"What surprised me is that I was also able to figure out who I was as a person and work out my identity. \"You don't play footy to work out who you are as a person, but that was a great outcome of my time with the Warriors.\" Gray has Maori heritage. For the first time in her life, her time with the Warriors gave her permission to immerse herself in her own culture and additionally have the confidence to embrace it even though she does not live in New Zealand or have a deep understanding of the language. \"By learning to express myself through my culture, it also gave permission to other women in the team to be who they were. \"We were able to see people as individuals, as people and that helped us to gain trust and come together as a team.\" Gray is hoping that she can bring some of these learnings to the Titans. \"You can be part of some of the greatest and most successful teams, and I certainly have been, but culture and togetherness is what makes it worthwhile. \"If I can take that and help implement it at the Titans, I know that every member of our team will have the chance to be the best they can be on and off the field.\"    "}, "/news/2021-11-28/siren-sport-natasha-van-eldik-bowls-australia-what-women-want/100624530": {"description": "Bowls is changing its look by listening to what women want", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " You wouldn't generally expect a 30-year-old to be such an accomplished national lawn bowler, but in her already esteemed career, Natasha Van Eldik has made more than 300 international appearances for Australia. In June, she made history by becoming the first woman to win three Australian Open singles titles, and now has her sights set on next year's Commonwealth Games. Van Eldik started playing at 15, when she was looking for somewhere to belong. Bullied at school, she made a deal with her parents that if she picked up a sport, she could leave school half an hour early. But she admits her initial attraction to lawn bowls wasn't the sport itself. \"At the time, I chose bowls because it was only $2 and the bowling club had the best hot chips in town,\" she said. She went once a week, and for the first nine weeks in a row she didn't even bowl. \"The coach at the time [Tony Scott] said 'please, can you just put down some bowls so you can say you've actually done something?'\" Van Eldik said. \"And I did, and he was basically like 'oh wow, there's a lot of talent here.'\" Scott rang Van Eldik's parents the next week and told them he wanted to coach her, because he believed one day, she'd play for Australia. And he was right. Three years later Van Eldik went to the Delhi Commonwealth Games, where she became the youngest player to represent Australia in lawn bowls. \"When people think of bowls they think it's only for older people, that's far from the case,\" Van Eldik said. For Van Eldik, the experience of coming into bowls as a young woman was overwhelmingly positive. \"Everyone at the club made me feel really welcome. I kind of fell in love with it. Within the first few weeks [of playing] I realised it was my happy place.\" she said. But Bowls Australia admits that hasn't been the experience for all women. \"We've heard stories from across the sport where women have been treated badly, whether it's from men, but also from other women,\" Bowls Australia CEO Neil Dalrymple said. \"From an inclusion point of view, it's been difficult, and the statistics don't lie. A third of our membership participation is women. We're nowhere near the population breakdown. So there's a real gap there.\" Driving change in order to attract and retain women from all generations is now a key focus for Bowls Australia. Knowing anecdotally some of the barriers and experiences women were having across the sport, Bowls Australia formed a Women in Bowls working party. A survey was then used to gather data to support a new strategy to drive change. Professional player, former CEO of Bowls Tasmania, and current Bowls Australia High-Performance Manager, Rebecca Van Asch, is part of that working party. Van Asch first got into the national team 11 years ago, and despite having positive experiences herself, she was aware change needed to be made. \"There's been a concerted effort to focus on younger demographics and make sure that the sport has longevity coming into the future,\" she said. Part of that longevity strategy is developing more women leaders through a 'Future Female Leaders' program that focuses on admin and leadership skills. \"We struggled to get a lot of women to step up to fill board positions, they're still very much male dominated,\" Dalrymple said. \"What we're doing now I think hopefully will have an impact on the sport for five, 10, 15, 20 years to come.\" Closer to the green, the survey results also highlighted ways the bowls community could change to modernise and promote inclusivity. That included scheduling of games, flexible options with less commitment and more competitions centred around social connections. \"Historically, like golf, we offered women's-only competitions during the week, during the day, so if you worked or went to university or school, you couldn't play bowls, so having competitions at night, under lights and on weekends and at different times is critical,\" Dalrymple said. And yes, the uniforms also came up. \"There's definitely been a demand for more modern outfits and to be more female friendly, clothes that you can wear when you walk down the street and not feel like people are staring. \"One of the women of the advisory group used to wear a white dress and white hat and didn't want to get out of the car because she didn't want to be seen, so it's definitely important,\" Dalrymple said. By engaging with this research and the working group, the sport has been able to more clearly understand the nuanced experiences of different women and small things that create big barriers. Bowls Australia will now work to implement the strategy over the coming months. Natasha Van Eldik found community and connection through joining a sport that welcomed, encouraged, and included her from the moment she walked into the rink at Raymond Terrace, looking for a happier place. Bowls Australia has challenged itself now to commit to making this the new normal for women of all ages wanting to find theirs.      "}, "/news/2021-11-28/matildas-tony-gustavsson-dress-rehearsal/100656514": {"description": "Matildas boss Tony Gustavsson as much a part of this 'dress-rehearsal' as his players", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " In the week leading up to the Matildas' first friendly match against the USA on Saturday afternoon, Tony Gustavsson spoke about how he and his team were treating the game as a \"dress-rehearsal\" for the 2023 Women's World Cup final.  All the routines, he said, were being done in the same way: press conferences and planning meetings, analysis work and training content.  It was an unusual departure from his own approach to previous friendlies, which he had always categorised as \"preparation mode,\" as opposed to the \"performance mode\" of major tournaments, such as the Tokyo Olympics. That's how he was able to explain (or, in a harsher light, explain away) some of the concerning, inconsistent performances of his side since he took over in January; they were, and are, all part of the longer project. But this stand-alone game, played at the venue chosen to host the 2023 Women's World Cup final, would be different. This, as much as they could mimic it, would be the end-point of that project. \"I've always talked about the process,\" Gustavsson told media the day before the game, \"but this isolated game is kind of a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to handle a game similar to a World Cup final. \"We're gonna go in with a mindset that it's all about winning this game and nothing else.\" He'll surely be relieved, then, that this was just the dress-rehearsal. A 3-0 loss to his former national team – with the first goal scored in the 24th second following a mix-up between his two teen-aged centre-backs, one of whom was on debut – is not the kind of World Cup final he had probably been trying to manifest. It is, of course, difficult for any team to perform after a moment that will likely be clipped into a \"fastest goals ever scored\" YouTube highlights reel. It visibly knocked the energy out of the team, and sucked the air out of the record-breaking 36,109-strong crowd at Stadium Australia. But this is the thing about tournament football like World Cups: you must expect, and be able to adapt, to the unexpected. And leading into this first friendly, it was no different. In the days beforehand, a bug had swept through some of the players, affecting their fitness and availability. Some, like Alanna Kennedy and Emily Gielnik, were carrying injuries. Others arrived late from half a world away, deeply jet-lagged and missing crucial training time. Others still, like Clare Polkinghorne and Sam Kerr, were being load-managed. These various player ailments, all of which unfolded days out from the game, is as close as Gustavsson may get to replicating the preparation for a World Cup final: by that point, after a tight, gruelling three weeks, bodies are beginning to fail: injuries have claimed one or two players, clubs are concerned about their stars being over-worked, others are called up as rapid replacements despite having missed significant gelling time. Most, though, are just exhausted. Against the USA on Saturday, we saw what one version of Gustavsson's adaptation – his response to the unexpected – looked like. Having lost his two senior starting centre-backs, Gustavsson chose two of the youngest, most inexperienced players on the squad in 17-year old Jessika Nash and 19-year old Courtney Nevin to take their place from the opening whistle. It came as a shock to most given both Ellie Carpenter and Steph Catley played centre-back roles at the Tokyo Olympics, while others like Karly Roestbakken and Angela Beard, both of whom were kept on the bench, have experience in the role at club level. The teenagers' naivety was, unsurprisingly, exploited. The opening whistle had barely faded from the air before a mis-cleared header from Nash and a lack of player tracking from Nevin led to the USA's opener. It was the second-fastest goal the Matildas ever conceded, and a particularly unfortunate start to the senior career of a young defender in Nash who has been touted as a future captain of the senior side. One wonders whether Gustavsson couldn't have taken a less risky approach; the same that saw him move Ellie Carpenter into centre-back alongside Nevin after substituting a frazzled Nash at half-time. \"We need depth in the back-line and we need to look at players and be brave enough to actually get them into these types of games,\" Gustavsson told media afterwards. \"Normally, if this was 15 years ago and I was coaching, I'll probably give them 10 minutes at the end when we'd either won or lost the game. \"But those minutes are not at the same value as warming up, a record crowd, US in front of you, in the stadium that's going to hold the World Cup final. To be able to deal with that, in that environment, is what we need.\" To their credit, they did: the two youngsters – and the rest of the team – settled following the early goal, warming into both halves. Indeed, by the end, the Matildas out-possessed the Americans 61 per cent to 39 per cent, out-passed them 506 to 335, and had 7 corners to their 2. They even had more shots on target (8 to 6), and were it not for a dazzling debut by USA goalkeeper Casey Murphy, who kept out fizzing strikes from Kerr, Caitlin Foord and Mary Fowler, as well as a bizarre moment from Matildas striker Kyah Simon who missed a totally open goal, the score-line likely would have reflected what became a much more even statistical contest. But the fact is that those things did happen, and the score-line remains a stark reminder of the Matildas' ongoing frailties, both at the back and up front. Gustavsson knows that. \"[When] I say we're going to treat this as a World Cup final, it's a very important reminder that the World Cup final is going to be won and lost inside the 18 [yard box]; inside the penalty areas,\" Gustavsson said. \"I think we're winning the game in between the boxes […] but then when you look at the actual finishing, they win the finishing game by 14 to 11, and the score-line three-nil. \"So where are games won or lost? It's how you convert those penalty entries to chances, and conversion rate in scoring. And I think they were much more clinical than us in that area. So I'm happy with the game in between the boxes, but we have a lot of learnings to take inside the boxes from today.\" But the two penalty boxes aren't the only spaces where lessons are, or should, be learned. It's inside the coach's box, too. Because Saturday's game against the USA wasn't just a dress-rehearsal for the players. It was one for their manager, as well; a test for how Gustavsson could handle the kinds of unplanned injuries and unavailabilities, inclement weather, sceptical media, and expectant crowds that will likely meet him come 2023. His response to the ubiquitous centre-back problem arguably missed the mark in game one. Whether we see the return of old cast members, or if their understudies are given a second rehearsal in game two on Tuesday, remains to be seen."}, "/news/2021-11-28/2023-women-s-world-cup-leaving-first-nations-legacy/100587244": {"description": "2023 Women's World Cup is already changing the game for First Nations communities", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Tarntanya. Meaanjin. Naarm. Boorloo. Gadigal. It seemed, at first, like a small thing: using traditional place names to describe the cities set to host the 2023 Women's World Cup. After all, these names are far older than the ones we use every day when talking about Adelaide, Brisbane, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney and are increasingly more commonly known. But when FIFA unveiled the tournament's official brand in October, these place names were flashed across the screen in big, bold letters alongside their New Zealand counterparts: Tāmaki Makaurau (Auckland), Ōtepoti (Dunedin), Kirikiriro (Hamilton), and Te Whanganui-a-Tara (Wellington). This is, in fact, no small thing. It's the first time that First Nations languages have been incorporated into a World Cup identity in the tournament's history. Accompanied by a rich, earthy colour-scheme and Indigenous motifs – a collaboration between FIFA and local artists Fiona Collis (New Zealand) and Chern'ee Sutton (Australia) – these deliberate language and design choices hint at the work being done behind the scenes to ensure the 2023 World Cup is not an empty cultural gesture. Rather, they are all part of systemic changes already happening within the sport; a piece of the larger legacy 2023 wants to create and leave, particularly for the First Nations communities being highlighted and celebrated. \"It is something that is very important for us, [and] for me personally,\" said FIFA's chief women's football officer Sarai Bareman after the unveiling. \"Being New Zealand-born myself and coming from the region, I think something that's really amazing about both [countries] is that we have these incredibly unique Indigenous cultures here. \"To start to see the cultures of both Australia and New Zealand seep into the day-to-day work that we're doing here at FIFA, it's something that I totally embrace and everyone who is involved in the tournament is totally embracing. \"It's funny for me to hear some of my colleagues speaking Māori to me these days, but it's something that I totally welcome and I think it's something that is really important as we build up to this event. \"I'm a proud product of the Pacific region and it's really, really important that those two cultures shine through and that the rest of the world can really feel and resonate with what they both represent.\" Even though the Women's World Cup is still 18 months away, the ripple effect of co-hosting football's biggest tournament has already started to change the Australian game from within. In August, Football Australia (FA) appointed Gubbi Gubbi and Butchulla woman Courtney Hagen as their first engagement lead for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. Hagen, who hails from south-east Queensland, had previously worked with Cricket Australia as a First Nations and social inclusion specialist, collaborating with Indigenous, gender-diverse, and LGBTQIA+ communities at the community sports level. Hagen's role at FA includes the development and implementation of FA's first Reconciliation Action Plan (RAP), as well as overseeing the creation of the governing body's first National Indigenous Advisory Group, with current and former First Nations players such as Karen Menzies, Kyah Simon and Jade North joining the inaugural body. \"Sport is a space and a catalyst not only for social change but it's something that brings people together in its purest form; it's bigger than all of us,\" Hagen, who led the push behind the use of traditional place names in the World Cup branding, told ABC Sport. \"Years ago, I was part of an excursion from Tennant Creek to Alice Springs for an Indigenous round for a sport. Bringing those kids that lived five hours away down to somewhere where they've never even seen the sport before – and them having the time of their lives – it really clicked for me that there's a lot of opportunity lost to people that live outside of capital cities and to people that don't have regular access to the same sports the rest of us sometimes take for granted. \"Seeing those situations and also seeing how sport can provide a space for people to feel safe being themselves, that’s fostered my drive to ensure that we have more availability and access for all those people who currently don’t have it. \"[Developing] the RAP is a great opportunity for football to start manoeuvring further in this space and ensure that community engagement is at the heart of everything we do; that cultural engagement and competency is fostered. Part of that, as well, is working with the 2023 Legacy team, which wants to accelerate change for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander players in the game.\" When it comes to the World Cup, Hagen – like Bareman – sees a unique opportunity to not just platform First Nations communities on both sides of the Tasman, but also to embrace those communities in a more genuine and meaningful way in the game. As part of their 2023 legacy plan, for example, Football Australia will launch a National Indigenous Program that aims to reach over 16,000 First Nations participants in the years following the tournament. John Moriarty Football  Indigenous Football Week \"Sport is not always about putting on the green-and-gold jersey or going to the Olympics. Sometimes sport is just being in a space that gives you something to look forward to. It's a massive support for a lot of people,\" Hagen said. \"We focus heavily on elite sport […] but being part of something that encourages a positive relationship with movement, with social cohesion, improved mental health and creating healthy relationships between people – that's probably the most integral part of sport for me. \"I think football is really embedded in culture; it's fast-paced, it's exciting, it's accessible, it's relatable. It's strong in its sense of self and what it represents in every way. I think there's a great narrative to thread through that. \"One example are place names. Yes, while these events are in capital cities, they're also in places that have traditional names and have rich histories that outdate every one of us. \"[The World Cup] is a great way for those stories to come to life in a space like this. So that's what I really hope it looks like, and that's reflected not only in our players but our fans that will be attending, the way we broadcast and talk about it, the way it's written about, the way the commentators speak about it. \"It can't all be encompassed in just a flag; it's telling the stories of the diversity of our people, which hasn't really had the opportunity to be told well. What I really want to see is that storytelling, whether it be football-related or not. \"There's nothing more exciting than being able to share your culture on a world stage and global sporting tournaments provide the opportunity to change a nation and start conversations. I'm really looking forward to being involved in that; to see the way the World Cup can raise the bar and celebrate the oldest living and continuing culture in the world.\" The 2023 Women's World Cup will be a tournament of firsts in many ways: the first co-hosted World Cup across two confederations, the first held in the Asia-Pacific region and the first in which its media and broadcast rights are unbundled from the men's tournament. It could also be – if these early announcements are anything to go by – the first World Cup that genuinely recognises and embraces the First Nations communities that have and continue to make football a truly global sport."}, "/news/2021-11-27/doubts-growing-about-ashes-test-match-in-perth/100656298": {"description": "50-50 chance: Doubts growing about Perth hosting Ashes Test match", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " WA Cricket chief executive Christina Matthews says there is now only a 50-50 chance of the fifth and final Ashes Test match being played in Perth. The game is fixtured at Perth Stadium from January 14, five days after the completion of the fourth Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground. WA Cricket had been confident the match would go ahead in Perth, but it would need exemptions to the WA Government's border rules for that to happen. \"It's a matter of whether cricket can meet those demands or not,\" Matthews told ABC Radio's National Grandstand program. \"I think it's quite possible that Cricket Australia might have got a bit distracted over the past week. But there's still being a lot of work done on getting the test here. \"One of the difficulties for cricket is just the high level of technology that's needed around the broadcast and the number of people that are needed around the broadcast compared to an AFL broadcast. \"It's one thing getting the players in [but] it's another thing getting the people who have to broadcast.\" bullish on the chances of the match being in Perth \"We will wait as we have always done for our government to sign off on it,\" she said at the time. \"What I am happy to say is Tasmania wasted the ink in their printer.\" The clear favourite to host the match if Perth Stadium is unable to is Tasmania, considering the state's earlier interest. Bellerive Oval in Hobart is set to host numerous Big Bash League and Women's National Cricket League matches across December and January, so moving the Test to Hobart would require a shuffle in those fixtures. It is currently hosting Tasmania and Western Australia in the WNCL on January 7 and 9, and Hobart Hurricanes and Melbourne Renegades in the BBL on January 17. Canberra shapes as another option, but it faces similar fixturing problems, with three WNCL matches from January 7 to January 11, which could impact on wicket preparations at the venue. An outside option could see two Tests played at the SCG."}, "/news/2021-11-27/usa-beat-australia-matildas-3-0-sydney/100631628": {"description": "USA claim 3-0 win over Australia in the first of two friendlies", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Fortunes were mixed for the Matildas as they took on world number one USA in Sydney on Saturday, losing 3-0 in the first of a two-game friendly series. Australia went behind early, conceding a goal in the 26th second through former Melbourne City player Ashley Hatch, but the Matildas settled as the first half wore on and they went into half-time on the ascendency. It was Tameka Yallop's 100th cap for her country, and she captained the side against the USA, the same team she scored the game-winning goal against in Australia's one (and, so far, only) win over the reigning world champions back in 2017. The second half was much of the same, with the USA scoring early. However, the Matildas had several chances on goal that USA goalkeeper Casey Murphy, on debut, kept out. Kyah Simon had Australia's best chance, skying the ball over the crossbar from inside the six-yard box, while Sam Kerr had a header that fell straight into Murphy's arms. USA midfielder Lindsey Horan hammered the final nail in the coffin, winning and scoring a penalty to make it 3-0 in the second half. However, the silver lining for the Matildas was what happened off the field: they smashed the record for the highest attendance for a home Australian women's national team game, drawing 36,109 fans on a drizzly, cold day in Sydney. The record of 33,500 had stood for 21 years, first set at the Sydney 2000 Olympics. For more on how the match unfolded, check out our live-blog below. By Samantha L Well, that was perhaps not the game any of us were expecting. The USA have proven once again why they're the number one team in the world: the depth of their squad, reaching right down into the uncapped ranks, is stellar. Goalkeeper Casey Murphy was particularly impressive on debut, keeping out a number of big chance from the Matildas, while both Rose Lavelle and Lindsey Horan - two of the more experienced players in the side - pulled the strings, scoring two of the side's three goals. That's not to say they're perfect, though. The USA were opened up several times at the back, particularly in wide areas, and Australia had a couple of serious chances - including Kyah Simon's effort that bafflingly flew over the crossbar. Defensive questions linger over the Matildas, as they have always done. The new centre-back pairing of teenagers Jess Nash and Courtney Nevin was a risky one, and their inexperience was exposed a handful of times. But this is the point of friendlies like these and of introducing young players into the fold: Australia have a depth problem, and with two big tournaments on the horizon, limited time to back-fill. So you throw these players into the fray and see what happens. I, personally, think they did okay. They might not be the centre-backs of now, but they will be for the future. It was fantastic seeing Caitlin Foord find her old groove, and Sam Kerr was unlucky not to equal Tim Cahill's national goal-scoring record. In any case, it's been a momentous occasion: a 100th cap for Tameka Yallop and a broken crowd record that could stand for years to come. It's been brilliant being at Stadium Australia just for that. Let's see what lessons Tony Gustavsson and the team learn from today's match and the kind of response they'll provide in game two. Thank you so much for following along for my first ever live-blog! I hope you've enjoyed the chat, the game, and the gifs. I'll see you all again in three days as the Matildas face the USA in the second game in Newcastle at 8:00pm (AEDT)! By Samantha L So what do you do? Do you, as Tony Gustavsson did at the Tokyo Olympics, prioritise defensive solidity by reigning her into centre-back? Or do you make the Matildas more dangerous by allowing her to gallop down the wing? My thinking: attack wins games, but defence wins championships. The Matildas already have enough fire-power going forward (Foord, Raso, Gielnik, Fowler), but the biggest question heading into the Asian Cup and the 2023 Women's World Cup will be about how we can shore up our defensive fragilities. Carpenter may be the answer. By Samantha L"}, "/news/2021-11-27/germany-china-britain-three-way-tie-gold-skeleton-world-cup/100655758": {"description": "Britain, China and Germany all win the same skeleton World Cup race", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " China won. So did Britain. So did Germany. And with that, the World Cup skeleton circuit had a race unlike any other in its history. Geng Wenqiang gave China its first World Cup skeleton win, part of a historic three-way tie for the top spot. Geng, Britain's Matt Weston and Germany's Christopher Grotheer all finished two runs in 1 minute, 46.04 seconds. There had never been a three-way tie for the win in any World Cup skeleton race since the sport was added to the circuit in 1986. \"It's the best feeling,\" Weston said. Weston was Britain's first World Cup men's skeleton race winner since Kristian Bromley in January 2008. Grotheer is the two-time defending world champion, though this was only the second World Cup race win of his career. And Geng's first win came in his 20th career World Cup start, plus ensured that he'll be considered a medal favourite at the Beijing Olympics in February. The Chinese have never been a major player in the sliding sports, which have traditionally been dominated by European and North American countries. Geng joined the World Cup circuit in 2017, with hopes of finding his stride in time for the 2022 Games. For the Americans in the men's skeleton race, it was the end of a wild week. Austin Florian was 20th and John Daly finished 27th, capping a week where both tested positive for COVID-19 and weren't sure if they would be allowed to compete. Florian was cleared to race on Thursday, but Daly wasn't cleared until 20 minutes before race time. They needed the race to accumulate points toward Olympic qualification. The US will nominate its Olympic skeleton team in mid-January, and qualification is largely based on international point standings. \"It's been a really stressful week,\" USA Skeleton coach Tuffy Latour said. \"We didn't know if it had spread to anyone else on the team, and if or when Austin and John would be able to race. Austin was able to get one day of training, and John didn't have any days of training this week. I'm glad they were able to race today, and that we're able to move forward after a really hard week.\" In the women's race later on Friday, Russia's Elena Nikitina got the win with a two-run time of 1:47.83. Kimberley Bos of the Netherlands was second in 1:48.03, and Italy's Valentina Margaglio got her first World Cup individual medal by finishing third in 1:48.28. Nikitina and Bos have been first and second, respectively, in both races so far this season. There was another tie, too — but only for seventh. Megan Henry was the top US finisher, sharing seventh place with Austria's Janine Flock. Katie Uhlaender was ninth for the US, and Kelly Curtis took 14th for the Americans. The next World Cup skeleton races are next weekend in Altenberg, Germany.  "}, "/news/2021-11-27/teofimo-lopez-vs-george-kamobsos-jr-when-is-it-how-can-i-watch/100640692": {"description": "Everything you need to know about George Kamobsos Jr's lightweight title fight against Teófimo López", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Aussie George Kambosos Jr will finally get the chance to meet unified lightweight champion Teófimo López in the ring on Sunday (AEDT) at the Hulu Theatre in Madison Square Garden, New York.  This is a fight that has been in the offing for more than a year, and in that time plenty of bad blood has developed between the two fighters — including a scuffle between the pair's fathers at an open workout earlier in the week.  Here's everything you need to know.  The fight will (finally) take place on Sunday, November 28 (AEDT), or Saturday night in New York. The main card is set to get underway at 12pm (AEDT), or 11am in Queensland, 11:30am in South Australia, 12:30pm in the Northern Territory and 9am in Western Australia. The ring walks for the main event will likely be about 2:30pm AEDT. The fight is available to watch on streaming service DAZN in Australia. George 'Ferocious' Kambosos Jr, 28, is an undefeated lightweight from Sydney with a 19-0 record (10 KOs). Kambosos has not fought in Australia since October 2017, which might account for his relative lack of profile at home in comparison to his domestic rivals, such as Tim Tszyu. However, Kambosos certainly deserves praise and has earned his shot against López by beating former featherweight champion Lee Selby by split decision in October last year.  \"[They] think this is going to be an easy fight for him, but they're going to find out the hard way next week,\" Kambosos said. Kambosos has been disparaging towards López throughout the build-up to the fight, most recently telling Channel 7 that López is scared of him and has been trying to dodge the fight. However, there is little doubt that Kambosos is a massive underdog in this contest. Teófimo López is the current unified lightweight world champion, who currently holds the WBO, IBF, WBA (Super), The Ring and WBC (Franchise) titles. The brash 24-year-old from Brooklyn, New York represented Honduras at the 2016 Olympics and is undefeated as a professional, with a record of 16-0, (12 KOs). He has held the IBF belt since knocking out Richard Commey in 2019, but really burst into the wider boxing consciousness with a stunning unanimous decision victory over Vasiliy Lomachenko in Las Vegas. At the time Lomachenko — a three-division world champion — was rated as the second-best pound-for-pound boxer in the world.  López is heavy favourite for the fight and has said he'll knock out Kambosos inside the opening round. He's also been looking ahead to his next opponent, with a number of other fighters proposed by both López and his promoter Bob Arum, including Devin Haney, Gervonta Davis, Shakur Stevenson or even a move to super lightweight and the undisputed Scot, Josh Taylor. This has been a fight long in the offing, so bear with us.  The pair were originally due to fight on June 5 in Miami as a co-main event with Triller's exhibition between Evander Holyfield and Kevin McBride.  Australia's lightweight world title contender George Kambosos fight with unified champion Teófimó Lopez finally appears to have a home, but still no date. However, that date was moved to June 19, allowing for a full attendance as COVID restrictions eased in Florida. López tested positive for COVID, meaning the fight was delayed until August 14 There were then attempts to sort a venue in the Middle East or Australia, until a date of October 4 at Madison Square Garden was proposed. However, Triller subsequently moved the fight again, to Brooklyn on October 16, at which point the Kambosos camp finally said enough was enough and asked the IBF to find Triller in default, which it did, costing Triller an estimated $US10 million in lost expenses. The fight is now promoted by Eddie Hearn's Matchroom Sport. Both fighters boast undefeated records coming into this fight, with López boasting a 16-0 record (12 KOs) and Kambosos a 19-0 record (10 KOs). Kambosos is the mandatory challenger for López's IBF lightweight (135lb, 61.2kg weight limit) world title, but all three of his belts are on the line: the WBA, WBO and IBF, making this a fight for the unified lightweight title. The last Australian to be a unified champion was Daniel Geale, who held the WBA and IBF middleweight titles from 2011 to 2013. López certainly thinks so. The American currently holds a version of all four belts at lightweight, the WBO, the IBF, the WBA (Super) and the WBC (Franchise). So what's the issue? Well, the majority of the boxing world does not count the Franchise belt as indicative of the legitimate WBC champion — they believe Devin Haney (26-0) who holds the WBC belt, is the actual champion. Boxing can, at times, more resemble a gaudy men's fashion retailer than a sport such are the litany of belts flying around, but the WBC takes it to a completely different level. At lightweight there are currently three recognised champions in the WBC alone, the Franchise champion López, the champion, Haney and the Interim champion, Jo Jo Diaz. By the way, the WBA recognises two champions at lightweight, calling López its Super champion and Gervonta Davis its Regular champion, meaning there are currently seven world championship belts on offer across the four governing bodies in the lightweight division."}, "/news/2021-11-27/socceroos-south-america-playoff-world-cup-2022/100655718": {"description": "The Socceroos' path to the 2022 World Cup might have just become much harder", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The Socceroos' path to the 2022 World Cup has become more treacherous after the intercontinental play-off draw threw up another possible South American date. The draw for the intercontinental play-offs ensured Graham Arnold's men will face the fifth-best side in South American qualifying should they end up as Asian play-off winners. The Socceroos will be desperately hoping to avoid that familiar fate by finishing second in their Asian group and gaining automatic qualification to the finals in Qatar next year. Australia lies third in its pool with four matches remaining. If the Socceroos finish in that position they will have to play an Asian play-off against the third-placed side in the other qualifying group. Currently, that's the United Arab Emirates. Victory in that would then set up a one-off decider, at a neutral venue yet to be confirmed, against the fifth-placed South American side — currently Peru — on either June 13 or 14 next year. But with Colombia, Chile and Uruguay all still battling for the automatic top four qualifying spots in South America, there will be no easy opposition as the Socceroos found to their cost in the past. Although Australia ended a 32-year World Cup drought by beating Uruguay on penalties after a two-legged play-off in 2005, they also lost play-offs to Uruguay in 2001 and Argentina in 1993. Four years ago, Australia secured their passage to the 2018 World Cup with an intercontinental play-off victory over Honduras. Meanwhile, New Zealand's chances of reaching the World Cup finals were boosted by the intercontinental draw pairing Oceania's top side with the fourth-best team from North and Central America. With the Oceanian sides yet to play their qualifying group, New Zealand is overwhelming favourite to get through to face the fourth-placed CONCACAF representative, which is currently Panama.  "}, "/news/2021-11-27/wbbl-final-perth-scorchers-adelaide-strikers-perth-stadium/100655686": {"description": "Underdog Strikers target early success against Scorchers in WBBL final", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Perth Scorchers import Sophie Devine says she's ready to carry Beth Mooney off the ground if her fellow star opener can put in one more heroic display in Saturday's WBBL final against the Adelaide Strikers.  Devine and Mooney have formed the best opening partnership in the WBBL, with the duo both named in the team of the season. National team mainstay Mooney has plundered a league-leading 528 runs at an average of 52.8 and a strike rate of 132 for the Scorchers this season, while New Zealander Devine has scored 407 runs at an average of 33.92. The duo loom as key figures against a powerful Strikers bowling attack that has strangled the Brisbane Heat and Melbourne Renegades in back-to-back elimination final wins. A top of 36 degrees is forecast for Perth on Saturday, but Devine is confident Mooney will be able to handle both the heat and the Strikers attack. \"She's an absolute machine,\" Devine said. \"It probably doesn't look like it at times in the past. I think I was watching replays of her in the Heat colours — she was crawling pretty much in between overs. \"But she's an absolute champion. She's done this time and time again — not just in Australian colours, but for the Scorchers and for the Heat as well. \"I've got no doubt about her preparation. She's the ultimate professional, she knows what she needs to do. \"Fingers crossed she has a big one out there. If I have to carry her off, so be it, I'll take that.\" Strikers captain Tahlia McGrath was straight to the point when asked about the key to beating the Scorchers. \"For us it's about breaking the partnership of Soph and Moons really early. That's going to be a crucial decider in the game,\" she said. While the Scorchers earned direct passage into the final after finishing on top of the table, the fourth-placed Strikers had to win two elimination games in the space of two days to get there. Adelaide thrashed the Heat on Wednesday and destroyed the Renegades on Thursday before making the flight to Perth on Friday. McGrath is adamant her team won't enter the decider weary. \"Everyone was full of energy at the airport this morning,\" McGrath said. \"There's a lot of belief, there's a lot of fight in the group. It's a dream group to captain when everyone knows their role and performs. We've definitely got one more left in us.\" The Scorchers are hopeful of attracting a crowd in excess of 42,000 for the match at Perth Stadium.  "}, "/news/2021-11-27/australian-cricket-test-pat-cummins-happy-with-imperfections/100654852": {"description": "'I'm certainly not perfect': Cummins shows why he's the men's Test captain we need to have", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Hold the presses: Pat Cummins isn't perfect.  On the day he was announced as Australia's 47th men's Test cricket captain \"I won't always get things right, I'm certainly not perfect,\" he told a Zoom media conference on Friday afternoon. the revelations about the text message exchange that led to Tim Paine's resignation Cricket Australia confirms it has chosen Pat Cummins to lead Australia in the upcoming Ashes series, with former skipper Steve Smith appointed as his deputy. Last week, Cricket Australia (CA) chair Richard Freudenstein said it was \"absolutely appropriate that Tim has resigned the captaincy, which is in the best interest of Australian cricket\". \"The captain of the Australian (men's) cricket team has to be held to a very high standard,\" Freudenstein said last Saturday. The CA board had clearly lifted that standard since Paine was cleared of any wrongdoing in the text-messaging incident three years ago. But then again, cricket has always had a problem with imaginary lines, like the one David Warner and Cameron Bancroft tripped over when they conspired to sandpaper a cricket ball in South Africa in 2018, and the one Steve Smith sidestepped when he chose to look the other way at the time. It was appropriate that Smith — now back as Australian men's vice-captain — gave a rueful smile while sitting alongside Cummins on Friday, as his new skipper revealed he has imperfections. Yes, Cummins is tall, handsome, intelligent, considered and a natural-born leader, with a disposition that seemingly never gets ruffled. And yes, he's the world's number one men's fast bowler. Cummins seems perfect to such an extent that he has been portrayed as a CA poster child, a golden boy for the organisation. But he's not having a bar of it, telling reporters he's not \"overly comfortable\" with those sorts of descriptions. \"That's probably really hit home in the last few days seeing Tim [Paine],\" he said. \"I think at times that sends a bad message — that everyone's perfect, that no-one has any flaws.\" Cummins added that Australian cricketers face enormous pressure being put on a pedestal. \"I think a lot of the pressure and the responsibility of being perfect is unreasonable, I think it's too much to ask of anyone,\" he said. \"We're going to have players come into our side who are teenagers, who are just out of school, who are growing up. \"They've got to be able to fail and know they're allowed to grow from that.\" And so — without even trying — Cummins demonstrated that he will be the leader that Australian men's cricket needs by directly taking on his own chairman and the assertion that the leader has to be held to a very high standard. Because this is a leader who will embrace imperfections. \"When it comes to … moral character, I'm probably my harshest critic and judge on that,\" he said. Cummins said he had already had some great conversations with Freudenstein and CA chief executive Nick Hockley. He wasn't concerned about upholding a higher moral standard than the rest of the team or indeed the average Australian. \"I know with the role comes added scrutiny, but for 10 or 11 years I've been playing for Australia in the public eye,\" Cummins said. \"There's going to be things that pop up, but as long as I can sleep at night I'm really comfortable with the responsibility of that.\" You suspect Cummins sleeps pretty well. But you also suspect that there are things he's done in his past that he's not proud of. Tim Paine will take a break from all forms of cricket and will not be available for the upcoming Ashes. We have all done things we're not proud of and that's the point. In the cancel culture era, it's easy to get a group of people outraged at a perceived slight and ever more difficult to draw a distinct line between what is morally acceptable and what isn't. We all know about those pesky imaginary lines: they bloody well keep moving on us. Paine made a self-confessed blunder that was at one moment acceptable to Australian cricket's power brokers, yet three years later it wasn't. Whatever your opinion about his actions, be sure that Paine is paying a heavy price. Smith said \"I don't want to know about it\" on the field when the ball-tampering incident was unfolding at Newlands in Cape Town in 2018, a crime that cost him a year in cricket's wilderness. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. Increasingly, we all feel impelled to judge and then immediately come to a conclusion about what is wrong and right, without taking the time to consider the myriad shades of grey that is the reality of existence. But you suspect that Cummins gets nuance. \"I'm certainly going to be standing up for players if they make some minor mistakes,\" Cummins said. \"They're opportunities to grow from; not always ideal, but they happen. \"We've got to manage our expectations of everyone a little bit more. \"I think we've got to be a bit kinder and a bit more understanding at times.\" That last statement drew another nod of understanding and approval from Smith. Cummins could well be the leader for our times. Just don't call him perfect."}, "/news/2021-11-27/glen-fearnett-standing-tall-for-teammate-rod-owen-sexual-abuse/100639024": {"description": "Inspired by a teammate's courage, Glen is confronting childhood sexual abuse", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Glen Fearnett is one of those pragmatic characters who refuses to embellish the anecdotes from his amateur sporting career. Asked what sort of footballer he was in the purple of his youth, Fearnett's answer is blunt: \"I was a hack.\" As a teammate, he will permit, he offered a little more. You could talk to Glen for hours on end, and the only time his emotions overcome the steady flow of sensible observations is when mention is made of some teammate or another — the teammates he still doesn't want to let down, even though they haven't laced up their boots for 35 years. One of those teammates, Glen Parker, sums up Fearnett: \"He was just one of those blokes you knew you could rely on. He wasn't flashy or showy, but he was one of the first picked because he was so selfless.\" On April 3 this year, like on any other Saturday morning, Fearnett sat at the breakfast bar of his Melbourne home, silently reading the news from his iPad. Lynne, Glen's partner of the last 25 years, was accustomed to this undeviating routine and initially noted nothing unusual. But this time it was different. story it accompanied It was a team photo taken in 1976, moments after Owen had been sexually molested by Beaumaris Primary School librarian and football coach, Darrell Ray — Glen's school librarian and football coach, too. The story became immediately and intensely personal for Fearnett. Like Owen, he'd played in the St Kilda Little League. And Owen was not just his former schoolmate, but the cheeky, brilliant kid who grew up just a few houses away from the Fearnetts on John Street, Beaumaris, right by the Elysian fields of their sporting youth. Now Owen — infamous for decades as the superstar whose life became a bonfire of drugs, alcohol and violence, was finally telling the world what had really happened: The devastation wrought by his abuse by Ray and St Kilda Little League team manager Albert Briggs, and the seedy role football clubs and the Victorian Education Department had played in enabling Ray and other paedophiles. Rod Owen was a St Kilda star at 16, but within a year he was an alcoholic and drug addict. Many blamed his spiral on injuries and partying, but his addictions masked childhood traumas he'll never forget. Studying Owen's bewildered expression, Fearnett could read no further. No longer was Glen his grey-haired, 59-year-old school teacher self. He was 10 years old again, looking down at five-year-old Rod, innocent and sweet, in need of protection. From the other side of the breakfast bar, Lynne studied her partner's face and realised something was wrong. Glen could hardly form words. \"You have to read this,\" he stammered. \"I know this kid\" — the kid, he emphasised, not the man — \"and I've never told anyone before.\" He turned the screen around to Lynne and finally let go of the words he'd never allowed to escape his lips in 49 years: \"This happened to me.\" Glen Fearnett turns 60 in late December, which means his life can be divided into 120 six-month increments. The present one, he admits, has been his most acutely difficult. Telling Lynne, their children, friends, Glen's employer, a lawyer, and Victoria Police's SANO taskforce what happened to him turned out to be the straightforward parts. For Glen, it was another matter to reckon with: his unjustified sense of guilt, then the anger that came with the knowledge he wasn't alone in his experience, as he'd always assumed. Fearnett says his abuse had occurred five years earlier than Owen's, at the hands of Darrell Ray's brother-in-law, fellow teacher and football coaching partner Gary Mitchell — at Beaumaris Primary and in the St Kilda Little League program, the pair are now accused of sexually abusing boys at a rate that has startled even experienced lawyers. It was 1972. Glen was 10 years old. He says a school camp that had seemed innocent and fun turned dark when Mitchell coaxed him into the teacher's quarters. Glen's memories are not just vivid but photographic: The room's pale yellow walls and blue furniture upholstery, his escalating sense of panic and confusion, the fear that paralysed and silenced him. Somehow, he says But, he says, an angry internal conversation as 10-year-old Glen scurried away still occasionally plays on a loop inside his head: \"Why didn't I fight? Why did I just sit there? Is there something wrong with me? Why didn't I do anything?\" \"I said to myself, 'You can't tell anyone. No-one will believe you and they'll think you didn't try',\" Glen says. \"How do you explain that to your mates?\" Not knowing the danger that lurked at every corner of the schoolyard upon his return, Fearnett set himself a goal: Always get picked in Darrell Ray's first-string team, not the seconds team coached by Gary Mitchell. It was the first of many bargains he made with himself, to stay silent and unacknowledged. Recently, Glen sat down and made a series of staccato notes, explaining his silence and the burden he's carried. \"For 50 years I thought I was alone,\" he wrote. \"It was only me. Don't tell anyone.\" There followed the full list of self-rebukes that filled his childhood: \"You can't tell anyone.\" \"They'll laugh at you.\" \"They'll point at you.\" \"They'll talk about you.\" \"They will humiliate you.\" \"Just don't say anything and no-one else will ever know.\" The what-ifs are still the hardest part. \"Once I read Rod's story, I reflected on what had happened to me and the sense of guilt was just overpowering,\" Fearnett says. \"I couldn't help but think that, if I had done or said something, perhaps Rod wouldn't have been in that position. That's just soul-destroying. It's heartbreaking.\" That internal conflict, Fearnett's old Beaumaris Football Club teammate Glen Parker says, is \"typical of a good team player\". \"Even for him to internalise it for so long, it's self-preservation, but it's also stopping anyone else around him from having to deal with it,\" Parker says. \"If you were going to war with someone, it would be someone like Glen.\" For Glen, such reassurances will never sink in. \"It's a treadmill: I understand it wasn't my fault and I understand I didn't have the skills to speak out,\" he says. \"I can do the counselling. But it doesn't make it easier. \"I can't get past the fact that, if one person spoke up, that a lot of this might have been avoided. No-one can say 'that's not possible', because it didn't happen. We can't go back and try it again.\" Glen's inability to change the past prompted an obvious alternative: \"What can I do now?\" He saw Rod Owen standing alone as the public face of a problem that had caused widespread harm in the Beaumaris community. He felt it was time to stand beside him. \"I didn't want to be 70 and saying, 'Geez, I should have done something,\" Glen says. \"It's hard enough not having said something when I probably couldn't have. \"If I turned around now and said, 'I'm not going to stand up and be counted now', I wouldn't like to imagine how I'd think of myself. Some things just have to be done.\" When Lynne considers it, she briefly becomes as serious as Glen: \"He's got guts.\" Another obstacle, Lynne says, was that Glen \"didn't feel important enough\" to take his story public. First Follower: Leadership Lessons from Dancing guy \"There is a person dancing like a fool on the hill at a music festival,\" Glen says. In the video, a narrator explains that it is not the man dancing like a fool who causes hundreds of others to join in, it is the first dancer who jumps in to join him. \"You need someone to take the lead, but the moment you have another one, all of a sudden you get others and it all multiplies very quickly,\" Glen says. \"It looks stupid when one person is doing it. When two, three, four, a hundred are doing something, it looks normal. \"Some of the other guys have been devastated by this. \"It is a matter of everyone seeing that Rod got out there and spoke. \"His life was destroyed. Mine wasn't, but I'm saying, 'Rod, I'm standing right behind you.' \"I'm hopeful someone else will go, 'OK, there are two out there'.\" When he says this, Glen can only manage one more thought before another tear arrives: \"They're not your teammates for one year — they're your teammates forever.\" Often now, Fearnett catches himself comparing his quiet, suburban life with the chaos of Owen's, or the series of tragedies that befell their friend, Trevor Foster, a St Kilda Little League star who was repeatedly abused by Darrell Ray and fell into a fatal spiral of drug abuse and homelessness. \"I was just straight out lucky,\" Glen says. \"I had stability. I had the support of friends and family.\" The impacts on Glen, though subtler, have been no less profound. A refusal to even consider having children was among the problems that ended his first marriage. \"Any sort of excuse I could make, I would,\" Glen says. He admits he can still be cold, defensive, dismissive and passive-aggressive. Some of the ice thawed when he met Lynne in the mid-90s, while they were working together in the fitness industry. Effervescent and easygoing, she made difficult things seem easy, juggling the new relationship, work, study and the parenting of her three young kids. Then a family tragedy threw them all together in Glen's home — the nest he'd been determined to keep empty. Thrust into the role of parent, Glen knows he wasn't perfect. Lynne now shrugs and says she just had to do \"some buffering\" to keep the peace. \"I would have loved the relationships to have been better,\" Lynne says. \"But you don't know what you don't know.\" She now thinks of the warning signs, like Glen's irrational refusal to allow the kids to be picked up or dropped off by any other parent or coach on sports days. \"It used to annoy me,\" she admits. \"I was forever trying to calm him down and tell him it would be all right.\" At restaurants, back against the wall, Glen would scan the room like a bodyguard, identifying nonexistent risks. \"His eyes were always scanning,\" Lynne says. \"I'd say, 'Calm down, it's OK'.\" More vexing were the times when Glen went to his \"dark places\" — depressive episodes in which he'd silently brood in a favourite chair for three days at a time, unable to communicate or go out. They started in his teens and were put down to pubescent hormones, although Glen admits: \"If we're being honest, there were some times where I wondered whether it was all worthwhile.\" He winces at the knowledge, which can finally be expressed among the family, that everyone walked on eggshells. \"Everyone in my family has had to make compromises for my behaviour and relationships were strained at times,\" he says. \"They didn't make that choice. I could see what I needed to do but there was no chance I could do it.\" Easing up on himself, Glen can also see it as pragmatism: \"The chances of me going to that dark place and not resorting to alcohol or violence or drugs was luck,\" he says. \"I'm fortunate that the coping mechanism was that I just became insular.\" The professional legacy of Glen's secret was a 20-year detour into engineering before he settled into the teaching career that had always been his aim, but which presented a paradoxical difficulty: He didn't want to teach kids. In 2005, wary of a faltering TAFE system, he made the leap to high school teaching and loved it. Yet his darker moments since meeting Lynne, he now realises, have tended to coincide with the return from school holidays. \"You could almost put it in the diary at one point. You could circle this date or this date, a week before school started back,\" he says. \"You could just about count on that really dark thing. Everyone would have to tiptoe around me. I'm talking about deep, nasty, horrible sensations.\" Maybe 25 years ago, Glen thinks, he was on the verge of telling Lynne his painful secret, but something held him back. He is now more aware of the depth of her stubborn support: \"Lynne has hung in there all this time,\" he says. \"I'm not sure others would have.\" For Glen, intense frustration has come with new-found knowledge of issues beyond junior football ranks: That, at Beaumaris Primary, paedophiles had run rampant for almost a decade, abusing untold numbers of children. Using a coveted St Kilda jumper as bait, a 1970s paedophile ring turned the Saints Little League dreams of many boys into a nightmare. \"What I'm really, really angry about — to the point of internal boiling — is that there were people at the school and in the education department who knew this,\" Fearnett says. \"I'm a teacher. I have been for 30-something years. I'm continually astounded and shattered by the consequences and the size and scope of the offending. \"The victims were my friends. And there are so many of them. It still makes me shake my head in disbelief.\" At Beaumaris Primary, Ray and Mitchell were not alone in their offending. Another football coach and teacher, Graham Steele, was abusing boys, and their time at the school overlapped with a fourth paedophile teacher who cannot be named for legal reasons. \"The fact that there were four people abusing kids at one school in one time, how on Earth did that happen?\" he asks. \"It's not a miracle. It's not some coincidence that they all ended up at the one place at the one time. It can't be. \"Who let it happen? What became evident fairly quickly was that this problem was systemic at the school and the school had a part to play in it. It never should have happened. Finding that out made me extremely angry. \"The school knew. The Department of Education had to know.\" Via court documents and news stories, Glen has discovered that his abuser, Mitchell, had not only offended at another school before being deployed to Beaumaris Primary, but would offend again and again, somehow remaining employed by the Victorian Education department until 1993. Ray, too, had offended at another school before his posting at Beaumaris. \"shuffled from school to school\" including, most recently, Tasmania \"I pity the offenders,\" he says. \"What they chose to do in their life, they were abject failures in their jobs and abject failures as people. \"I feel sorry for them, that they couldn't meet a set of standards that a normal person would consider the minimum. They were no good at anything. \"But, for the people who allowed it to happen, I have absolute disgust. I don't know that hatred is quite the right word but, even if they're no longer around to be held accountable, their memories and legacies need to be held accountable. \"I'm sure their kids and grandkids think they were wonderful. They should know the truth about them.\" Fearnett believes that not even the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse has enabled the reckoning his employer is due. In the coming weeks, Fearnett says, he and Owen will seek an appointment with Victoria's Education Minister, James Merlino. \"I'm part of the education system at the moment and we're temporary custodians of it,\" he says. \"The people before us had their time. But we speak for it now. There needs to be an admission about what went on. They need to be open and explain what they've changed. \"People seemingly didn't care. We were 10. They were supposed to be the people who looked after us and protected us and they simply didn't do that. \"It almost feels like it was, maybe not encouraged, but there was an absolute apathy towards 9, 10-year-old kids. \"For God's sake. I still don't get that. I can't understand it.\" At a Port Melbourne cafe a few Saturdays ago, there was another arresting sight: At a table turned 45 degrees, two middle-aged men with their backs against the wall sipped long blacks, their eyes scanning the room. Rod Owen and Glen Fearnett had barely seen each other since boyhood. It could have been awkward, taxing, a struggle for the right words, even a let-down. But warm conversation flowed. No false bravado. No false modesty. Just the brotherhood that tightens between teammates who know they can win a crunch game against a formidable opponent. \"Glen is such a special person,\" Owen had said days earlier. Now he could tell Fearnett of his own self-doubts — that he'd panicked the night before his story was published, unsure how people would react — and how Glen's first email of disclosure and support hours later had vindicated his decision. \"I wanted you to know that someone would stand, shoulder-to-shoulder, with you,\" Glen said. He had photos to show. Names and places from 50 years ago came back to life. Inevitably, at a point, Glen's guilt came to the fore. He was 10 years old again, walking away from that room — silent, afraid and unaware of the dark events in train. Owen interjected. \"It's not your fault,\" he said. \"You just need to know that none of this was your fault.\" On the way out the door, pondering the possibility of a bigger group next time, Owen explained what it felt like to have a teammate like Glen Fearnett: \"When I shook his hand, I got a shiver up my spine.\""}, "/news/2021-11-26/western-united-snap-nine-game-losing-streak/100655536": {"description": "Wenzel-Halls goal gives John Aloisi first win as Western United manager", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " A 78th-minute tap-in goal for substitute Dylan Wenzel-Halls gave Australian football legend John Aloisi his first victory as manager of Western United. The Victorian club snapped a nine-match losing streak in A-League Men with their 1-0 win over Perth Glory at home. At his third different A-league Men club, Aloisi showed his managerial skills, bringing on Wenzel-Halls in the second half to make the difference in the game. The 23-year-old had two shots saved by Glory keeper Brad Jones before being gifted a goal after the ball ricocheted off the keeper, then the post, before landing at his feet mere centimetres away from goal. Wenzel-Halls said after the victory he felt a release of pressure after scoring his first goal for his new club.  \"To score my first goal for my new club is a monkey off my back,\" he said. \"[Connor] Pain did so well [with the cross] and I couldn't miss from there. \"We weren't at our best but we were still able to grind out a result.\" It was a tactical first half with both sides trying to work their way through each other's defence. United centre-half Alessandro Diamanti tried an ambitious shot from the other side of halfway in the 20th minute, trying to steal an unlikely opener as Glory keeper Jones stood off his line.  But Jones was able to back-pedal and palm the ball over the crossbar for a corner. Glory had the best chance of the first half just moments before the break when striker Bruno Fornaroli found himself with just the keeper to beat in the box. From an acute angle, the Uruguayan sprayed his left-foot shot across the goal face to keep the sides scoreless at half-time. Fornaroli had another chance five minutes into the second half when he was on the end of a great pass from Daniel Stynes, and took it again into the penalty area. From a similar spot as he did in the first half, Fornaroli fired a left-foot strike which this time United keeper Jaime Young had to parry away for a corner. From there, United gained the ascendancy, threatening to create chances inside the Glory box. But similar to last week's loss to Melbourne Victory, United could not find the back of the net.  The breakthrough finally came in the 78th minute when Connor Pain took the ball to the by-line and fired a cross which came off Jones and hit the far post. The ball bounced into the path of Wenzel-Halls, who was standing in the goal mouth for the tap-in score. The defeat means Glory have just one point from their opening two games.  The Perth side had plenty of hype going into the new season with the signing of English superstar Daniel Sturridge, who did not play on Friday.  With three points on the board, United will be hoping this is a sign of things to come under Aloisi.  United will face defending champions Melbourne City next week, while Perth remain in Melbourne to face Victory on Sunday."}, "/news/2021-11-26/nrl-melbourne-storm-tui-kamikamica-charged-by-qld-police/100654574": {"description": "Melbourne Storm NRL player charged by Queensland Police over alleged incident outside hotel", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The Melbourne Storm have stood down NRL player Tui Kamikamica after he was charged by Queensland Police over an alleged incident involving a woman in Brisbane, with the incident being investigated by the NRL's integrity unit. On Friday afternoon, the Storm released a statement, confirming the club's decision. \"Melbourne Storm has today stood down Tui Kamikamica after he was charged by Queensland police over an alleged incident involving a woman outside a Brisbane hotel,\" the statement read. \"[The] Storm were made aware of the charges on Thursday afternoon and advised the NRL integrity unit immediately. \"Due to the seriousness of the allegations, the club made the decision to stand down Kamikamica, pending his plea in response to the allegations, the [outcome of the] NRL integrity unit investigation and the club concluding a formal, in-person interview with Kamikamica, who remains out of state. \"This will take place next week. \"[The] Storm believes firmly that there is no place in the game or society for violence against women at any time, in any circumstance. \"The club will not make further comment until it has been advised of Kamikamica's plea and conducted further enquiries.\" Fiji-born Kamikamica played 22 matches for the Storm in the 2021 NRL season, including the preliminary-final loss to Penrith at Brisbane's Lang Park in September. The prop has made 55 appearances for the Storm since his NRL debut in 2017. Kamikamica, 27, has represented Fiji at the Test level."}, "/news/2021-11-26/usman-khawaja-at-peace-with-ashes-rival-travis-head/100654058": {"description": "Close Ashes selection call looms for 'good mates' Khawaja and Head", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Usman Khawaja says he'll have no issues if he's overlooked for his mate, Travis Head, for the first Ashes Test. Khawaja and Head are bidding for the vacant No.5 batting berth in Australia's team for the first Test against England starting in Brisbane on December 8. The state captains squared off in a Sheffield Shield match in Adelaide this week in their last first-class audition before the Ashes. Queensland's Khawaja scored four and South Australian skipper Head eight in their first innings. Head then scored 101 in his second-innings before Khawaja slammed a 52 not out from just 36 balls to secure the Bulls an eight-wicket win. Khawaja shunned the billing of the Shield fixture as a shootout between the members of Australia's 15-man squad for the first Ashes Test. \"I'm going to be 100 per cent honest with you: It's not even on my mind right now,\" Khawaja said. \"I'm honestly just trying to win games for Queensland and whatever will be, will be. \"Heady deserves it as much as I do. \"I'm really good mates with him. \"I have got no issues with whatever happens.\" Khawaja and Head have both scored two Shield tons this season, with the Bulls leader also posting two half-centuries and Head scoring one. Pat Cummins has become the first Australian fast bowler in history to earn a full-time gig as Test captain. So why are quicks rarely picked for leadership? Simon Smale explains. The 34-year-old Khawaja, whose last Test was in August 2019, said his mind was at ease when, in the past, he would have been anxious about possible Test selection. \"I wasn't always mellow,\" he said. \"This is experience … I have just come to realise after a long time of a lot of work with myself and my mind and just learning about myself, [being anxious] just doesn't help. \"The best time I play is when I am relaxed. \"And, to be honest, I have got a lot of things in life that I am very grateful for and those are the things now that I focus on. \"Because I know, within the cricket bubble, how much it can get you and that is how I used to be — it has taken years and years of practise to not be that way.\"  "}, "/news/2021-11-26/afl-rookie-and-preseason-draft-live-blog/100653554": {"description": "Every pick made in the 2021 AFL rookie draft", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Some young recruits and more experienced figures, inlcuding Jared Polec and Levi Casboult, earn AFL lifelines via the rookie draft. See the full list of every player selected. By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton Told you it was going to be a quick one. I will update the order with all the picks taken and then we will leave it there for another year of drafting. Thanks for stopping by today and over the last couple of nights if you did, and we will see you in the summer for the AFLW season and then next year when the men get going again too. Have a good one! By Dean Bilton"}, "/news/2021-11-26/why-are-fast-bowlers-never-captains-test-cricket-team/100644806": {"description": "Fast bowlers are almost never Test captains, and it's for a reason you might not suspect", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Pat Cummins has been named the 47th man to captain Australia's Test cricket team. His selection might seem obvious: the current vice-captain who is a shoo-in for selection, when fit at least, who is almost universally liked and admired by fans and players. However, picking a fast bowler as captain goes completely against the historical grain. Incredibly, in 144 years of Test cricket, no fast bowler (excluding all rounders) has ever captained Australia's men's team on a full-time basis. The only time a fast bowler has taken the captaincy reins was in 1956, when Ray Lindwall skippered for one Test against India. So why is that? The answer, in part at least, lies in cricket's hierarchical past. Cricket, throughout its history, has been a tool through which the upper-middle class have maintained their social standing over the rest, be it across the Empire in Britain's varied colonies, or at home in class-divided pre-war England. This divide was obvious in places like the West Indies. CLR James wrote at length in his standout book, Beyond a Boundary, of the fight to install Frank Worrell as the first permanent black captain of the West Indies cricket team. Prior to Worrell's installation as skipper for the 1960-61 tour of Australia, the captain had always been European. James even noted that in the Caribbean's early dalliance with the game, black players were almost always bowlers — a situation that was often found in India too. Cricket Australia confirms it has chosen Pat Cummins to lead Australia in the upcoming Ashes series, naming the paceman as the new Test skipper.  The root of this discrimination against bowlers can be found in the old distinctions between Gentlemen and Players that existed in English cricket right up until 1962. Gentlemen were (nominally, at least) amateurs, playing for the thrill and of sufficient personal wealth not to need remuneration for missing work — although expenses were still paid for travel. The professionals, or Players, were those most unconscionable individuals who went against the Corinthian spirit that Victorian sport was built on by requesting payment for their time so as to make a living from their sport. Generally speaking, Players were bowlers and lower class, while the Gentlemen were batsmen and of the educated middle or upper class. A casual look at England's earliest Test captains (all batsmen) illustrates the social class from which they came, with two Knights of the Realm, two Lords and an Earl represented before the outbreak of World War I. Symptomatic of this discrimination is former England skipper Mike Brearley's assertion of what it takes to be a captain in his book, The Art of Captaincy. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. \"In England, charisma and leadership have traditionally been associated with the upper class; with that social strata that gives its members what [writer and poet] Kingsley Amis called 'the voice accustomed to command',\" he wrote. Not until 1952 did a professional get the nod to captain England — Yorkshire's Len Hutton breaking the class barrier and going on to captain 23 Tests, winning 11 and drawing 8. By the way, he was a batsman. It's unclear why this would have been the case in the notionally classless society of Australia, but was best illustrated by the glaring omission from the nations captaincy ranks of Keith Miller — even if he was an all rounder rather than a pure quick. It was suggested that Miller's espousal of the lighter side of the game perhaps made him less suitable for the more arduous diplomatic side of captaincy that was necessary in that post-War era.  Although there have been some notable exceptions in the past few decades — Shaun Pollock (South Africa), Kapil Dev (India), Imran Khan, Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis (Pakistan) and Jason Holder, Darren Sammy and Courtney Walsh (West Indies) for example — bowlers have tended to be shunned as captains globally. There are some more reasonable suggestions as to why this is, that ignore which public school they went to. One is that bowlers are more susceptible to injury and rotation. The other is that their primary skill is being utilised when in the field, the exact time that a captain's skills come into their own — captains that are batsmen have an obvious advantage over bowlers in this instance. Brearley, who was arguably selected as a result of his captaincy over his ability with bat or ball, wrote of the difficulties he felt bowlers would face if they were also burdened with the captaincy. \"It takes an exceptional character to know when to bowl, to keep bowling with all his energy screwed up into a ball of aggression, and to be sensitive to the needs of the team, both tactically and psychologically,\" he wrote. \"[Bob] Willis in particular always shut himself up into a cocoon of concentration and fury for his bowling.\" Derek Pringle, a player-turned-journalist who played under Willis, wrote in The Cricket Paper that he \"would martial proceedings from mid-off often in a daze, his bowling, with its long and winding run, having taken so much out of him\". Willis, incidentally, was the last fast bowler to captain England. In fact, if Andrew Flintoff and Ian Botham are excluded on account of their being all rounders, England has selected only Willis as a regular, fast-bowling skipper since World War II. He skippered 18 Tests, winning seven and losing five, with six draws — far from the worst record, but his exertions as England's premier strike bowler in the early 1980s did affect his captaincy. England stalwart James Anderson has long backed bowlers as captains, having been overlooked for the top job throughout his long and distinguished career. \"Bowlers do think a lot about the game,\" he said earlier this month.  \"We are thinking cricketers now. I think [Cummins would] be good at it. \"You can see he leads brilliantly in the team. He's a leader of the bowling attack and you can see he's got that ability, so why not give him a chance? \"There are lots of arguments why it would suit to have a bowler as captain, but it's just not the done thing, is it? \"Captains like to look good at first slip and look like they're making all the field-position changes and doing all the good stuff. But I'm all for it.\" "}, "/news/2021-11-26/pat-cummins-named-as-new-australian-mens-test-cricket-captain/100653122": {"description": "Pat Cummins and Steve Smith to lead Australia's men's Test cricket team as captain and vice-captain", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Pat Cummins will lead Australia in the upcoming Ashes series with England after he was named as the 47th captain of the men's cricket team, replacing Tim Paine. Former skipper Steve Smith, who was banned from leadership roles for two years over the ball-tampering scandal in South Africa in 2018, has been picked as Cummins's deputy. Cummins has played 34 Tests for Australia since 2011, taking 164 wickets at an average of 21.59, and he was Paine's vice-captain until the Tasmanian's resignation last week. Paine advised Cricket Australia (CA) he would be taking a leave of absence from all forms of cricket for the \"foreseeable future\" Cummins said he understood the responsibility that came with being men's Test skipper. \"I know with the role it comes with added scrutiny,\" Cummins told the media on Friday afternoon. \"For 10 or 11 years, I have been playing for Australia in the public eye. I might not always get things right, I am not perfect.  \"Things will pop up, but as long as I can sleep at night, I am really comfortable with the responsibility of that.\" Pat Cummins has become the first Australian fast bowler in history to earn a full-time gig as Test captain. So why are quicks rarely picked for leadership? Simon Smale explains. Cummins is the first fast bowler to captain Australia since Ray Lindwall led the team for one Test against India in Mumbai in 1956. The 28-year-old acknowledged fast-bowling captains were not the norm in Test cricket, but he was confident he could do the job with Smith as his deputy. He said he expected their relationship on the field to be built on a \"collaborative approach\". \"There will be times when I am out in the middle and it is a hot day, and I am in the middle of a (bowling) spell and I need to turn to people for advice, for experience,\" Cummins said. \"That is the main reason … I wanted Steve to be vice-captain. So I think how that looks, it potentially could look differently to what you are seeing how partnerships work in the past. \"Steve has got such huge strengths, especially around tactics on the field. \"I will be leaning on him usually for that, and it might look a little bit different from the outside to potentially how the captains have been in the past, and that is great.\" Smith said he had no concerns about working alongside Cummins. \"It is my job to help Patrick in any way that I can, and if there are times on the field when I can help — and I guess help the workload with Pat — then that is my job,\" he said. \"I am excited to be working with Patrick. We have known each other a long time. We are close friends. We get on really well.  \"I think we complement each other really well. I think I am really excited and I think this could be a really great partnership to get going forward.\" Smith's appointment as vice-captain has raised some eyebrows in the Australian and international cricket community because of his role in the ball-tampering scandal three years ago. He was suspended for 12 months following the incident and also served a ban from leadership positions inside the Australian team set-up. Smith said he respected the fact his appointment would be met with opposition from some cricket observers. \"I think there will be some negativity from some people around it, I understand that and I get that,\" he said. \"But, for me, I know that I have grown a great deal over the last three or four years. \"I am a more rounded individual and, in turn, I think it has turned me into a better leader and I am excited to be in this position next to Patrick.\" Paine resigned from the captaincy last Friday Tim Paine will take a break from all forms of cricket and will not be available for the upcoming Ashes. Cummins said he was fully supportive of Paine at this time. \"I been chatting to Tim the whole week, we spoke on the phone this morning,\" he said. \"I'll start by saying that we really feel for him and his family. He is really loved, a well-respected leader for our team. \"He has been incredible to me. He's been someone who I really have been looked after by. I've learned a lot from him. \"We love him, and we hope to see him back on the team soon.\" Smith said he had empathy for Paine, having himself stepped down from the Australian Test captaincy in 2018. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. \"I urge him to take care of himself and be really kind to himself, so my thoughts are with him and his family, and obviously he has taken a leave of absence,\" he said. \"Hopefully we can see him back.\" CA chief executive Nick Hockley said his organisation would support Paine while he took a break from cricket. \"We recognise that this is an incredibly difficult time for Tim and his family and we are committed to supporting them,\" he said. \"We understand that and we respect Tim's decision to take some time to focus on his family and his wellbeing, and we hope that he returns as soon as possible.\""}, "/news/2021-11-26/what-happened-at-the-2021-afl-draft/100652352": {"description": "Bolters and sliders: Inside the data the 2021 AFL draft", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " After a lifetime of grind, it's the shortest wait that feels like an eternity. For 65 of the most talented young footballers in the country, including a couple more mature-aged talents, the two nights of the AFL draft seem like they last forever. Some knew that they were going to get chosen at one point or another. A select few, like Nick Daicos and Sam Darcy, even knew which clubs they were going to. The father-son rule will again figure prominently in this year's AFL national draft, but does it give clubs a competitive advantage over others? But for many, the wait was excruciating. For those chosen, the eventual ecstasy was joyous to see. Since the introduction of the draft, the event has morphed from a small-scale gathering at league headquarters to a two-night, made-for-TV event. The draft isn't all for show, however. It serves a critical purpose for the 18 AFL clubs. It's the main way they are able to restock their lists with the best and brightest young talents around. So what actually went down at the 2021 AFL draft? Before the draft commenced, the AFL indicted there would be 91 potential picks. In more troubling news for footy fans who like their sleep, the order was updated after the first night to indicate there would be up to 10 rounds of draft picks. In the end, many clubs passed on their later selections, as expected going into the draft. All up, 65 picks were taken, up slightly on 2020. Many clubs passed on their later selections to convert the picks into rookie draft selections, which have a lower salary cap charge and a shorter contract length for each selection. But one part of the night was quieter than normal — the trade table. After as many as 17 live trades two years ago, the 2021 draft saw just 10 trades made. Most of these were quite late in the piece to move picks into next year, rather than larger strategic manoeuvring around dynamic player availability. A potential trade between Melbourne and Adelaide was dramatically denied, with Melbourne trying to package a pick they were not intending to use (pick 43) to move two spots up in the draft order from 39 to 37. However, due to some controversial moves in recent years, the AFL instituted a rule where two clubs couldn't trade the same picks between each other in the same draft year. The AFL denied that trade for that reason. In the end, Melbourne traded pick 43 for Adelaide's future third-round selection, getting some value back for the pick. Despite a lack of junior football in Victoria last year due to various COVID-19 outbreaks, Victorian players made up the majority of the draft, as is typical given the populations involved. In total, 36 players were picked up from Victoria. There were also the usual number of Victorians taken inside the top 20. By contrast, the draft was notable for its lack of talent from above the Barassi Line. This was the first draft since 2017 in which no player from outside Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia was chosen in the top 20. Only one player from NSW/ACT was selected at the draft, GWS Academy member Josh Fahey. There was also one Tasmanian (Sam Banks) chosen at the draft, while the Suns prelisted Bodhi Uwland and Sandy Brock from Queensland and the NT respectively. It was a good year to be a young player from WA or SA as well. Both states provided a comparatively high number of draftees, perhaps buoyed by the extra exposure from the lack of Victorian football. As such an important event in the AFL landscape, there is much speculation about where each player is likely to fall before the draft. In common parlance, they are known as phantom drafts. The ABC has compiled a variety of these and compared the averages to where players ended up being selected. For the first 14 picks, the order was almost exactly as expected. Then, West Coast decided to grab young Victorian midfielder Campbell Chesser and shook up the order. The pick of Chesser acted as a starting pistol for the fun to really start. Mature-age South Australian intercept defender Leek Aleer was then tabbed by GWS about 14 spots earlier than expected. By the end of the first night, surprising selections such Tom Brown, Angus Sheldrick and Kai Lohmann well and truly shook up what was one of the most predictable drafts in history. Fremantle wasted no time claiming Matt Johnson to kick off the second night of the AFL draft. Look back at how the night unfolded and see every pick from every club in this draft. The draft was generally heavy on multi-talented midfielders and light on key position players and rucks. Some clubs, drafting for need, initiated runs on players of a certain type. But for every surprising selection is a player that slides down the order. Prospective top-10 selection Matthew Johnson was invited to the WA live site event on night one of the draft. This indicated Johnson would at least be chosen inside the top 20. Instead, Johnson had to wait until pick 21, the first pick of night two, to hear his name called out. Jesse Motlop and Tyler Sonsie represented solid value in the 20s, while Blake Howes, Zac Taylor and Arlo Draper fell further than expected to the middle of the draft. The draft featured five father-son selections, five Next Generation Academy (NGA) players and one Northern Academy draftee — roughly one-sixth of the entire draft. While only three of the NGA players ended up at their nominated club, all bar two pre-tied players (Nick Daicos and Sam Darcy) ended up sliding down the order substantially. In the case of Daicos and Darcy, the Pies and Dogs paid little real cost in the end to match the bids for these top-end players. In combination, it will heighten speculation about why clubs fail to bid for players, and lead to further calls to reform the father-son and academy-drafting process in future years. Some players stand out as total surprises. None of the phantom drafts identified Flynn Kroeger and Cooper Whyte (Geelong), Garret McDonagh (Essendon), Harvey Harrison (Collingwood), Eric Benning (Fremantle), Dante Visentini (Port Adelaide) or Luke Cleary (Bulldogs) as likely draft selections. The clubs that ended up selecting all seven of these players were able to adeptly hide their intentions to the outside world, which might have made it easier to pounce with a later draft selection. All seven of these players were nabbed at pick 48 or later. The highest-ranked players not drafted were Williamstown's Fothergill-Round-Mitchell medallist Charlie Dean, overage Northern Territorian Ronald Fejo Jr, and Vic Country midfielder Charlie Molan. These players, seen as potential top-50 talents by draft watchers, stand a real shot of being picked up by a club as a rookie, either at the rookie draft or in the supplementary selection period. In the short term, few players drafted — even at the top end — will likely have an impact on the 2022 AFL season. With most of the players being just 19 years old next season, most will take a few years before their talent shines through. Patience is required in determining which clubs did well at the draft, and which clubs failed to identify the right talent. Even players who get out to fast starts in their new careers can end up fading out. But a club that drafts well can set up their future. One good draft class can catapult a good team to a premiership-winning one, which is why every club takes the draft seriously. So, who won the draft? Get back to us in 2026."}, "/news/2021-11-26/ralf-rangnick-manchester-united-interim/100652700": {"description": "German Ralf Rangnick set to take over Man United interim role", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Manchester United has turned to renowned German coach Ralf Rangnick in its bid to rescue its season.  No final agreement on the temporary role has been reached but discussions are ongoing about the former RB Leipzig coach leaving his role as head of sports and development at Lokomotiv Moscow. The managerial vacancy was opened up at United by the firing of Ole Gunnar Solskjaer on Sunday. Rangnick could be coach only until the end of the season but there is potential for an ongoing role at the 20-time English champions.  Former United midfielder Michael Carrick, who was on Solskjaer's coaching staff, has charge temporarily, with United saying it wants to appoint an interim manager until the end of the season before making a permanent appointment. Carrick started midweek with a 2-0 win at Villarreal, securing a place in the round of 16 in the Champions League. Eighth-placed United is back in action in the Premier League on Sunday at ladder-leading Chelsea, which is 12 points ahead of the Red Devils. But there is more than two-thirds of the season remaining for eighth-placed United to close the six-point gap on the Champions League qualification places. United would be going from the inexperience of Solskjaer to 63-year-old Rangnick, who has experience as a sporting director and coach — particularly at Salzburg and Leipzig, in Red Bull's network of clubs. Before then he won the German Cup with Schalke in 2011 when he also reached the semi-finals of the Champions League. Rangnick was a pioneer of the high-intensity pressing style of play developed in Germany and increasingly dominant in world football over the past decade. He was an influence on younger coaches, like Chelsea's Thomas Tuchel and Bayern Munich's Julian Nagelsmann. Rangnick was only the coach for two single-season spells at Leipzig, and one of those was spent in the second division with the then-fast-rising German club. Going to United could allow him to get accustomed to the team before moving upstairs when a permanent manager is appointed. Most of Rangnick's time over the past decade was spent as sporting director, first at Salzburg, then Leipzig, then in an overall role for the whole Red Bull network, overseeing transfers and hiring while coaches handled the day-to-day tactical work. His most recent role in Russia with Lokomotiv Moscow has been more of the same, with overall authority for transfer strategy and the recent appointment of a fellow German, Markus Gisdol, as coach. Rangnick has regularly been linked with high-profile jobs at top European clubs over the past decade, without the rumours ever quite being realised. He came closest when he was linked with the AC Milan coach's job for much of the 2019-20 season, but the move fell apart after incumbent Stefano Pioli improved results enough to earn a contract extension."}, "/news/2021-11-26/hewitts-australian-side-beaten-by-croatia-in-davis-cup-opener/100652364": {"description": "Hewitt's Australian side beaten by Croatia in Davis Cup opener", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Lleyton Hewitt's Australia team has endured a miserable start in its quest to bring home the Davis Cup after Marin Cilic outstayed a gutsy Alex de Minaur in a remarkable contest to seal Croatia's victory in the opening group tie in Turin.   Canada 0 Sweden 3 France  2 Czech Republic 1 Croatia 3 Australia 0 After Australia's Alexei Popyrin had been on the end of a shock 7-6 (7/5), 7-5 defeat from Borna Gojo — a late stand-in ranked more than 200 places behind him — Australian number one de Minaur saw his excellent comeback attempt thwarted 6-1, 5-7, 6-4 on Thursday by old foe Cilic. It sealed the Croatians' 2-0 lead with the Australians so desperate to get something out of the tie that they later threw de Minaur, after only a short break, into the remaining doubles to give them more of a chance to still reach the quarter-finals. The gamble did not pay off, with Croatia sweeping the tie as Nikola Mektic and Mate Pavic took care of de Minaur and John Peers in the doubles, 6-3, 6-1. That task of making the last eight has become much harder after not even the emotional encouragement of captain Hewitt at courtside in the Pala Alpitour arena was enough to lift his two top players as they ran into opponents in inspired form. All is not lost but Australia will now have to beat Hungary on Saturday, probably by a 3-0 margin, to give themselves a chance of making the last eight. De Minaur had to pull out some of the magic that had seen him go unbeaten in singles in the last edition of the men's world cup of tennis two years ago and for a while he did just that as he fought back in astonishing fashion from 6-1, 3-1 down to take their compelling rubber into a decider. But the 33-year-old Cilic, who'd defeated de Minaur in a US Open thriller three years ago, rediscovered his irresistible form of the opening set to oust the Sydneysider in a topsy-turvy 130-minute affair. \"Alex is such a great fighter and it's not the first time he's come back in a match like that,\" said Cilic, praising the 22-year-old opponent who'd ousted him earlier in the year on grass at Queen's Club. Popyrin, the world number 61, had earlier been expected to give the team a flying start against the depleted Croats, who plunged world number 276 Gojo into the singles at late notice. Yet the big-serving understudy, filling in for injured luminary Borna Coric, produced the performance of his life over one hour and 49 minutes. \"This was probably the most painful loss I've had,\" said the 22-year-old Popyrin, sounding a little emotional. \"I had chances in the first and second sets but I did hit some mistakes on important points and I think that let me down.\" Popyrin had already beaten Gojo in Melbourne in a tight three-setter in February and, ranked number three in Australia, was the obvious choice for Hewitt as the second-string singles player in the absence of Nick Kyrgios. He began only his second Davis Cup appearance in confident style but after earning five break points on Gojo's big delivery in the Croat's first three service games, his failure to convert came back to haunt him. Popyrin played a poor opening set tiebreaker, featuring a series of unforced errors that cost him the stanza but, despite gifting up 27 unforced errors throughout the match, he had not been remotely threatened on serve until the 11th game of the second set. A nervy double fault and a stray backhand suddenly gave Gojo the chance to serve for the match, which the 23-year-old took with aplomb. Carlos Alcaraz, the teenager touted as Rafael Nadal's heir and the biggest name in Spain's team at the Davis Cup finals, tested positive for the coronavirus and was dropped from the squad on Thursday. The 18-year-old Alcaraz, who was going to make his first Davis Cup appearance, said on social media he was sad to miss out on “such an important and special tournament like the Davis Cup\". “I was very excited to be able to play and represent my country here in Madrid in front of our fans,” he said. “But sometimes things don't go how we want them to go and you have to overcome that. It's a very tough blow but you have to pick yourself up and come out stronger.” Alcaraz was expected to play in the Group A meeting with Ecuador. The International Tennis Federation earlier said a member of Spain's team had tested positive for the coronavirus and was put in isolation, but did not name the player. The rest of the Spanish team members took a new PCR test.  The 32nd-ranked Alcaraz, coming off a title at the Next Gen ATP Finals, will be replaced by world number 60 Pedro Martínez.  The other members of the Spanish squad are Pablo Carreno Busta, Alberto Ramos-Vinolas, Feliciano López and Marcel Granollers. The team captain is Sergi Bruguera. Spain was already without Nadal because of an injury, and it lost number 19 Roberto Bautista Agut earlier this week because of an abdominal injury. Spain is the defending champion at the Davis Cup Finals that are being played in Madrid, Innsbruck and Turin. Thursday was the first day of competition in all three cities. The matches in Austria are being played without fans because of the coronavirus pandemic. Capacity is at 60 per cent in Turin and 75 per cent in Madrid.  "}, "/news/2021-11-26/kings-gambit-magnus-carlsen-cement-legacy-greatest-chess-player/100646162": {"description": "Norway's king of chess looks to cement his reign as Queen’s Gambit draws new wave of subjects", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The \"Mozart of Chess\", Magnus Carlsen of Norway, will be out to extend his world championship reign when he takes on Russian challenger Ian Nepomniachtchi in their 14-game title match starting on Friday night Australian time. The match was originally scheduled for last December but was postponed due to the pandemic. It will be held alongside the World Expo in Dubai. The winner will pocket $1.65 million. The loser will be able to wipe away his tears with $1.1 million. Carlsen has sat astride the chess world for more than a decade. He first reached number one on the International Chess Federation (FIDE) world rankings in 2010, when he was just 19 years old. He's held the title of world champion since 2013, when he beat Indian great Viswanathan Anand. The following year he achieved the highest peak classical rating in history: 2882 – more than 30 points better than Garry Kasparov at his best. Queensland Grandmaster David Smerdon is one of the few Australians to have faced Carlsen over the board, holding him to a draw at the 2016 Chess Olympiad in Azerbaijan. \"He sees things at a different level,\" Smerdon told ABC Sport. \"It's not just that he does the same thing as everyone else but better, it's patterns on the board and long-range plans that he just sees that other people don't.\" After first making his name as an attacking maverick, Carlsen is now renowned as a virtuoso of the endgame. \"He can have these completely equal, almost bone-dry positions, where most Grandmasters would look at each other and say 'OK, let's call it a draw', but he just keeps playing,\" Smerdon said. \"He has this ability to squeeze something out of nothing.\" Ian Nepomniachtchi (pronounced YAN ni-POM-ni-shee but known commonly as Nepo) is four months older than Carlsen, who will turn 31 during the world championship. Nepo is regarded as a highly gifted player, blessed with an amazing memory. But he's also prone to being erratic and temperamental. When games move beyond his meticulous opening preparation, he'll often play intuitively and at speed. \"It's so hard to pick with him,\" Smerdon said. \"There are two Nepos: the one who can lose to me, and the one who can win a match against Carlsen. We just don't know which one is going to turn up.\" It was clearly \"Good Nepo\" on show during the 13-month long, COVID-disrupted Candidates Tournament, which he won to set up his title challenge. That said, most models and betting markets have Carlsen as a prohibitive favourite, even though Nepo holds a 4-1 head-to-head lead (with six draws) from their previous classical games. \"If you look through those games, some of them were from when they were quite young, so I wouldn't put a lot of stock in that record,\" Smerdon said. The match is a best-of-14-game series that could last through to mid-December, should it go the distance.  The players will each be given two hours for the first 40 moves of each game, followed by another hour for the next 20 moves. They'll then have 15 minutes for the rest of the game, with an increment of 30 seconds per move added from move 61. If the classical section finishes 7-all, the title will be decided by tie-break speed games. Judging by his recent preparation, Carlsen may have had one eye on that scenario. He's been playing dozens of online blitz and bullet games since returning from a two-week training camp in Spain. \"Conventional wisdom is that you just don't do that,\" Smerdon said. \"Most coaches will tell you to avoid blitz as much as possible before a big match, but he doesn't care. \"He's the number one in the world at every time control, which I don't think has ever happened in history.\" The match will be played in front of spectators and media at the Dubai Exhibition Centre, and relayed on the popular internet chess server chess.com. \"Watching just one game between two players for six hours can be really tough,\" Smerdon conceded. \"But I guess it's got some similarities to Test match cricket in that the commentators do a good job – they're not just talking about that one game the whole time, there are interviews and other things to maintain your interest. \"I also think one of the biggest advantages of chess compared to a lot of other sports is that you don't have to watch it live. \"You can just wake up the next day and there'll be lots of articles and video commentary about how the game went, and you can get the whole picture pretty quickly without feeling that you've lost too much from the live experience.\" The game of chess has never been so cool, and with a TV series about a female chess player breaking audience records, many in the sport hope it will lead to more women players. Smerdon expects there to be more interest than ever in the outcome, after a surge in chess participation following the success of the Netflix series The Queen's Gambit. \"It's been pretty big,\" he said. \"Like online, I think their monthly sign-ups on chess.com tripled during the period after the show, and all the clubs around Australia have seen increases in memberships. \"It's been either new players signing up or people who maybe played in school and haven't played in a while who saw the series and were like 'oh yeah, I forgot I liked that – let's get back into it.'\" All games begin at 4:30pm local time (Dubai), 11:30pm AEDT"}, "/news/2021-11-26/how-indigenous-matildas-star-kyah-simon-using-voice-fight-racism/100639246": {"description": "How First Nations footballer Kyah Simon found her voice", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Kyah Simon has always been proud. It was one of the first lessons she learned from her fierce mother, Pam, an Anaiwan woman from northern New South Wales, and her dad, Gordon, a Biripi and Kamilaroi man from Newcastle. Like many First Nations people, Pam and Gordon's own pride was forged in hardship; suffering was layered throughout their lives like sediment, strengthening them both over time. Pam was one of 13 children. Her own mother, Betty, was ripped from her family as a girl to work as a maid. She escaped when she was 14, her country calling her back home. At some point, Betty met Reg – a white man. He was quickly shunned by his own family, and the two of them moved to Sydney. Pam had been born by now, along with some of her siblings. The family lived simply, stretching a single loaf of bread as far as they could, cooking on an old portable gas stove in the single bedroom they all shared. Betty, Reg, and the kids ended up in Sydney's south-west. One afternoon, Pam and her teenage brother Neil passed a white man on the street who spat racist insults at them: calling them \"a black-this\" and \"a black-that.\" Neil confronted him, defending himself and his sister. The man attacked, beating the boy until he almost passed out. Pam dragged the man off her brother, punching and slapping and scratching him; the pain and rage of generations coursing through her veins. Trauma trickled down on Kyah's dad's side, too. Gordon was surrounded by violence growing up. He and his cousins would sometimes jump the fence at the Newcastle Show, too poor to afford tickets, and head straight for Jimmy Sharman's boxing tent. They'd fight each other and collect the coins thrown at them by white punters. Gordon's father and uncles had joined the army during World War II. They were not even Australian citizens back then; it would take another two decades for a referendum to decide that. Nonetheless, the four teenage boys signed up to fight for the country they loved — their country, the one they never ceded. They all turned to drink when they returned; ancient wounds buried beneath modern scars. Gordon remembers seeing his mother with a black eye, remembers pulling pieces of glass from his dad's wristwatch out of her bloodied head. She died when he was 12. His sister followed a few years later – a drug overdose – leaving behind two young children. These were stories Kyah only learned about as she got older. Pam and Gordon shielded her and her three siblings Aaron, Sarah, and Wesley from the brutal realities of their family's past. They wanted to wait until their kids were old enough to understand why it all happened and what it all meant. what had been left unsaid. She learned about Betty and Reg, about the loaf of bread, about Neil being beaten half to death for defending the colour of his skin. She learned about Gordon's dad, about Jimmy Sharman's boxing tent, about the war and the alcohol and the wristwatch. Kyah sat quietly, listening as her mother back-filled her own story, adding angles and depths to her own identity. She had always been proud, but as she learned more about where she had come from – the sacrifices, the suffering – her pride turned into something else, something stronger, something with power and direction. \"[Pride] is something that I carried with me from a very young age,\" Simon told ABC. \"Growing up in the western suburbs of Sydney with mum and dad and my three siblings, something that really stayed true to us growing up was our parents enforcing that it's OK to be who you are, to believe in yourself, but also to be proud of who you are: be proud of the colour of your skin and your background. \"I still [am] to this day. My parents faced a lot of discrimination and racism, and my siblings and I have had our fair share, but we've never shied away from the fact of who we are and being proud of that. \"There have been instances where a bit of doubt comes into your mind. [You wonder] whether you want to say something because you don't want to receive that backlash that might have a negative impact on you just purely saying what your background is. \"I'm very proud to be Indigenous, as is the rest of my family. But that doesn't shy away from the fact that there have been challenges throughout my life, my siblings' life, my parents' life. You have to have thick skin when it comes to these kinds of topics.\" Sport, especially football, helped. Even though she grew up in a rugby league family, supporting Penrith and Cronulla (she lived close to the Fifita boys), it was football that captured her, catapulting her into who she is. \"It enabled me to show my true identity and made me the person I am today,\" she said. \"That's the beautiful thing about football, to be honest. Because it's the world game – because there's so many different cultures and countries and backgrounds that play it – when you play football, you have a common ground with a lot of people. \"Your culture doesn't really come into it that much: people just play because they want to play and you share that like-minded approach. We're all doing it because we love the game and it's fun. There's no discrimination. I think [football] definitely gave me an out with that. \"Through my sport, I've been able to express myself and be really proud of who I am. It's my identity; it's in my blood. I think sport – and football – has definitely helped me have the confidence to speak up and be proud and wear my heart on my sleeve and be proud of my culture.\" It feels fated, in some ways, that Simon went on to become a professional athlete given sport has become one of the most powerful platforms to address issues of racism and discrimination in recent years. This wider momentum, in addition to learning more about her own history, has given Simon the confidence to use her own voice in ways she may have hesitated to in the past. \"For me, there's been a bit of a movement going on,\" she said. \"In our own backyard and across the world, in terms of that acceptance of who people are – and obviously the Black Lives Matter movement – [there are] more voices not feeling like a minority when it comes to these kinds of topics. \"There's obviously other athletes that have paved the way and spoken up and maybe received a lot of backlash, [like] in previous times Adam Goodes and the stance that he took. There's been several athletes that have taken a stance just to be proud of who they are. \"I mean, I shouldn't have to sit here and say 'take a stance' because it should just be the norm. But I definitely think the voices that have been amplified over the last couple of years have given me the confidence to also drive that conversation. \"It is something just to be proud of; it's not something about being controversial. I think half of it is to share our background, share the knowledge that we have in terms of what it means to be Aboriginal. \"Now, with a little bit of help from social media – but also just with more and more people supporting great causes – it has definitely helped change that conversation and open people's eyes to get different perspectives, which we've never really been able to do before with just obeying the mainstream media and not many other viewpoints.\" One of Simon's most recent acts was during the Tokyo Olympics. In the first group game against New Zealand, instead of kneeling in solidarity with the Black Lives Matter movement, like the Football Ferns did, the Matildas did something different – something unique and meaningful to them. They held up an Aboriginal flag. \"Obviously, as a team, we're all in support of taking a knee [and] we're all in support of Black Lives Matter,\" she said. \"But [with] that originating in America, we wanted to do something a little bit closer to home. So we threw some ideas around. And I thought, 'What about if we hold the Aboriginal flag up in front of a team photo for our first game?' \"A lot of our inspiration came from Cathy Freeman at the Sydney 2000 Olympics. Mine did, especially, so it kind of [came] full-circle; that was probably the first time a lot of us saw the Aboriginal flag at an Olympic Games before. So I think that was something really powerful. \"It has many different meanings, but I think the main thing was for us to just show that we're in support of our Indigenous people. The flag should be shown; it's not really shown at many major sporting events unless my family's holding it up in the crowd. So the team were all in full support of that. \"I think it was probably one of my proudest moments to be a Matilda, to be honest, just because of how accepting and welcoming and open all the girls were. \"Now we have an Aboriginal flag up in the change-room for every game; it just stays in the kit now. It created a lot of positive conversation – more positive than negative – when we did do that. I know from speaking to my family, and their extended family and friends, that a lot of them said that was the highlight of the Games for them.\" Simon, who currently plays for Tottenham Hotspur in England, is now embracing her new-found voice, joining Football Australia's inaugural National Indigenous Advisory Group to guide football's engagement with First Nations communities. She wants to ensure that the pride she was taught to have, and the opportunities she was given, are things she can pass on to all those who come after her. \"To play my part and be included in the advisory group is a huge honour for me, and I think it's definitely been a long time coming,\" she said. \"It's going to help make important decisions in terms of our people and including more Indigenous people within our beautiful game. \"I know that other codes have done a lot of work in this space, and football is almost new to the party a little bit with it, but I think it's only going to give us positives: having more Indigenous players involved, volunteers, people in administration roles. \"It also just gives inspiration for so many of our young Indigenous kids across the country that can see people they relate to, like I did with Cathy [Freeman] when I was growing up. So I think it's only going to encourage more and more Indigenous people to get involved in the game.\""}, "/news/2021-11-25/horse-racing-jockey-glen-boss-announces-retirement/100652056": {"description": "Legendary Melbourne Cup-winning jockey Glen Boss announces retirement", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Glen Boss — who rode Makybe Diva to three consecutive Melbourne Cup wins — has announced he will retire after a Caulfield race meeting this weekend. Boss guided Makybe Diva to her three Melbourne Cup victories between 2003 and 2005. He also won a host of other prominent races, including the Cox Plate, the VRC Derby and the Golden Slipper. The 52-year-old's final race will be the Zipping Classic at Caulfield on Saturday. \"This decision is something I have been mulling over for the past six months and particularly over the last two or three,\" Boss said in an interview with Ladbrokes. \"I'm one of those individuals who is always 100 per cent, chips in all the way, and I made a promise to myself more than a decade ago … that if I got to the point in my riding career when I wasn't fully committed and all the way in, then it was time to finish.\" Boss said he had begun to face psychological hurdles late in his career. \"I just felt I was slipping a bit mentally,\" he said. \"Physically I am at the absolute top of my game, but mentally I was slipping a bit, and it really is a mental game. \"I felt it was the right time because I have so much energy and I want to put all that energy into something else, and that's what I am doing.\" Boss won 90 group 1 races in Australia, highlighted by his Melbourne Cup triumphs. He also won the 2005 Cox Plate on Makybe Diva, and guided So You Think (2009), Ocean Park (2012) and Sir Dragonet (2020) to victories in the weight-for-age classic at Moonee Valley. Boss's wins in Sydney included two Golden Slipper salutes on Flying Spur (1995) and Sebring (2008). He also rode Yes Yes Yes to victory in The Everest in 2019 and in the same year triumphed with Kolding in the inaugural Golden Eagle."}, "/news/2021-11-25/a-league-women-lisa-de-vanna-signs-with-perth-glory/100651848": {"description": "Matildas great De Vanna resumes career with Perth Glory", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Matildas great Lisa De Vanna will chase another A-League Women's title after signing with hometown club Perth Glory for the 2021/22 season. allegations last month of historical abuse during her career in Australian football Her allegations led to the formation of an independent complaint management process to be managed by Sport Integrity Australia. De Vanna's storied career appeared over when she left reigning champions Melbourne Victory in September. But the 37-year-old said she recently decided \"to get back on board\" by joining the Glory after discussions with head coach Alex Epakis and owner and chairman Tony Sage. Football Australia says it is committed to supporting Lisa De Vanna after she made allegations of historical abuse, as it sets up an independent system to manage complaints of misconduct. \"Alex Epakis has created a safe, supportive environment and Tony Sage showed me great respect by going out of his way to meet me in person, which I really appreciated and am grateful for,\" De Vanna said in a Glory statement. \"Alex has put no pressure or expectation on me; just for me to fall in love with the game again. \"I started my career here and now I want to give back to the family, friends and fans who have supported me all the way along my football journey.\" Epakis said De Vanna would play a significant role as a member of his squad. \"She has a proven track record at every level of the game, is extremely motivated to succeed on a team level and will provide even further X-factor to our attack,\" he said. \"Lisa has been involved with the team for over a month now, has fitted in extremely well into our environment and culture and is focused on working hard to ensure the team has a competitive campaign.\" De Vanna has had two previous stints with the Glory, in the 2008/09 and 2012/13 seasons. She won W-League championships with the Victory, Melbourne City, Sydney FC and Brisbane Roar. De Vanna was twice named in the FIFA Women's World Cup All Star team and was a member of the Matildas' victorious Asian Cup squad in 2010. The Glory have never won an A-League Women's championship, despite making three grand final appearances. They begin their season on December 4 against Brisbane Roar.  "}, "/news/2021-11-25/wbbl-melbourne-renegades-vs-adelaide-strikers-live-updates/100644436": {"description": "Strikers dominate Renegades to progress to WBBL final", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " The Adelaide Strikers have belted their way into the WBBL final with a crushing, nine-wicket win over the Melbourne Renegades. From the outset, the home side dominated Thursday night's 'Challenger' match at Adelaide Oval and never relented, bringing up the victory with 55 balls to spare. After winning the toss and electing to field, the Strikers restricted the Renegades to a paltry 8-83 — the fourth-lowest total in their history — to book their spot in Saturday night's decider against the Perth Scorchers. Strikers openers Dane van Niekerk (43) and Katie Mack (31 not out) were intent on having as much rest as possible before the final, treating the Renegades' demoralised bowling attack with disdain. Van Niekerk copped a nasty hit to the hand but managed to bat on before being caught 12 runs short of the target. The Renegades were immediately under pressure, with Strikers quick Megan Schutt (2-23) on song from the first ball of the match. Schutt, an Australian international, produced an outstanding inswinger to bowl makeshift Renegades opener Josie Dooley. It did not get any better for the Renegades as all Strikers bowlers got in on the action. Spinner Amanda-Jade Wellington — who produced the best bowling figures in WBBL history in Wednesday night's 'Eliminator' victory over Brisbane Heat — claimed the key scalp of Jess Duffin to overtake Jess Jonassen as the tournament's leading wicket-taker. Schutt's opening partner, Darcie Brown, was just as lethal, finishing with economical figures of 2-9. Not even Indian star Harmanpreet Kaur — who was named as the tournament's leading player — could rescue the Renegades as she was trapped lbw for seven. Renegades captain Sophie Molineux did not bat after opening for much of the tournament and she is believed to be carrying an injury.  "}, "/news/2021-11-25/soccer-player-danny-hodgson-out-of-icu/100651404": {"description": "'Huge milestone' as Danny Hodgson leaves ICU, but long, 'gruelling' road to recovery still ahead", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Perth soccer player Danny Hodgson has been moved out of the intensive care unit at Royal Perth Hospital almost three months after he was attacked on a night out. The 25-year-old talented player was leaving the city with teammates when he was allegedly punched from behind without warning near Perth Train Station in the early hours of September 5. He was taken to hospital with significant head injuries. His parents, Nicola and Peter Hodgson, arrived from the UK on September 11, having been granted a travel exemption to come to Australia. In a statement released on Thursday, they described their son's move to Fiona Stanley Hospital as a \"huge milestone\" but said he still had a long road ahead to recover. \"He must learn to swallow, drink, eat and eventually talk again and that is just the beginning,\" they said. \"His physical rehabilitation will be gruelling, and we know that, for every tiny step forward, there is likely to be setbacks. \"But we believe in Danny's strong spirit and, with the support of his wonderful girlfriend Jess, his family, and his friends, we know he can slowly and painstakingly move forward.\" The couple also thanked the West Australian public, Mr Hodgson's employer and staff at the Royal Perth Hospital, who nicknamed their son \"ironman\". \"One of the things that has got us through the last 82 days is the love and support of the Western Australian people and the kindness of strangers that continues until this day,\" they said. \"In an amazing act of generosity, suppliers and trades have come together to gift Danny and Jess the installation of a solar energy system, solar panels, ducted air-conditioning and a heat pump to assist with his long-term recovery. \"You are proof that Christmas angels do exist.\" A 15-year-old boy has been charged with causing grievous bodily harm over the attack."}, "/news/2021-11-25/australians-josh-giddey-patty-mills-star-in-nba/100651252": {"description": "Giddey joins elite NBA company, 'unbelievable' Mills stars in Nets' win ", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Young Australian Josh Giddey has again flirted with creating NBA history, while Boomers legend Patty Mills played a starring role for the Brooklyn Nets in their latest win. Giddey — the number six pick in the NBA draft —  narrowly missed becoming the youngest player in NBA history to notch a triple double. He finished with an equal career-high 19 points, eight assists and seven rebounds in the Oklahoma City Thunder's 110-104 loss to the Utah Jazz, who featured Boomers veteran Joe Ingles. The 19-year-old's haul in Oklahoma City was still enough to see him join LeBron James and LaMelo Ball as the only teenagers in NBA history to reach 100 assists and 100 rebounds in their first 20 games. He served as the Thunder's primary point guard for the second consecutive game in the absence of the injured Shai Gilgeous-Alexander. Mills landed seven three-pointers on his way to a 23-point haul, as the Nets defeated the Celtics 123-104 in Boston. He hit a trio of three-pointers inside the first five minutes for the Nets, who are on a four-game winning streak. Mills has scored at least 17 points in his last four games, with calls growing for the Olympic bronze medallist to be included in this season's NBA All-Star three-point contest. The 33-year-old joined the Nets from the San Antonio Spurs in the off-season, attributing his shooting form to \"settling in\" at his new team. \"I don't think there's anything more to it than that,\" he said. \"Just understanding what's needed from me, staying ready, being ready and knowing the ball's going to come flying at me at some point.\" Mills's performance drew praise from Nets head coach Steve Nash. \"Patty was unbelievable tonight and he's just been so big for us this year,\" he said. \"His spirit is incredible. His IQ and experience are amazing as well. Just the shot-making is elite. \"He does so many things for us and that kind of ties the whole thing together.\"  "}, "/news/2021-11-25/usman-khawaja-travis-head-jake-weatherald-sheffield-shield/100651022": {"description": "Usman Khawaja's captaincy may cost him an Ashes spot after Travis Head tons up", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " South Australian batter Travis Head has streaked to a Sheffield Shield century that could secure him a spot in Australia's first Ashes Test XI, and he can thank Queensland captain Usman Khawaja for the opportunity. With the first Test scheduled to start at the Gabba on December 8, the game at Adelaide's Karen Rolton Oval was the last in-game chance for Khawaja and Head to prove they deserved the sole spot up for grabs in Australia's middle order. Khawaja only managed 4 and Head 8 in their respective first innings on a difficult pitch, but after South Australia was dismissed for just 102 early on day three, Khawaja enforced the follow-on. That gave Queensland the best chance of getting a win but also gifted Head another shot to impress selectors and he snapped it up. The Redbacks skipper scored his second century of the Sheffield Shield season, making 101 before he was dismissed by Matt Kuhnemann. South Australia was eventually dismissed for 284, which left Queensland with a victory target of 88. The visitors were 0-5 at stumps on day three. Khawaja is set to bat at number four, but may not get the chance for a second innings, given Queensland has a seemingly comfortable run chase ahead on the final day. One of Head's batting partners, opener Jake Weatherald, was at the centre of a strange confrontation with Khawaja earlier in the day. Between the eighth and ninth overs, Queensland's Matt Renshaw placed a fielder's helmet in front of the stumps at the striker's end and Weatherald, after walking back to take his guard, wound up and just about kicked the badge off the helmet out towards gully. That earned him a stern rebuke from Khawaja, although the Queensland captain left the conversation with a smile, and the umpires had a word as well."}, "/news/2021-11-25/afl-draft-live-blog-second-round-matthew-johnson-sam-butler/100648566": {"description": "Every pick from every club in the 2021 AFL draft", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Fremantle wasted no time claiming Matt Johnson to kick off the second night of the AFL draft. The Dockers ended the draft one of the big winners with Johnson completing a high-profile WA trifecta with Jye Amiss and Neil Erasmus also joining Freo on night one. North Melbourne, Collingwood, Richmond and Adelaide were among the other clubs to cash in on some sliders and complete solid draft hauls. Look back at how the night unfolded and see every pick from every club in this draft. By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton It's been a big couple of nights! I hope your club got everything you wanted from this draft (shout out to Freo, North and Pies fans who must be feeling pretty good about life right now). I'll be back tomorrow afternoon for the rookie and preseason drafts, so I hope to see you all then. Until then, have a good night. By Dean Bilton The rookie and preseason drafts are still to come! They will be held tomorrow afternoon and offer clubs the opportunity to put some players on their rookie list, either those who missed out in this draft or who may have just come off other AFL lists. By Dean Bilton I would have to say the slides of Zac Taylor and Arlo Draper were my biggest surprises, so with that in mind I think Adelaide and Collingwood respectively have done really well for themselves. Apart from that most of the second round went as expected, and then everything after that is a bit more of a lottery. By Dean Bilton All clubs have passed in their remaining picks and that is that from the 2021 AFL national draft. By Dean Bilton Another father-son, and this one the son of a Brownlow Medallist no less. Taj is a hard-working and intelligent player on the outside of midfield or off half-back. He has good skills and makes good decisions. By Dean Bilton Another tough Geelong-based midfielder? The Cats say yes please. They've gone hard in that area tonight. By Dean Bilton The Levi Greenwood replacement is in. Charlie Constable couldn't break through at Geelong over the last few years but has bossed the VFL in the meantime. He'll get a crack with the Suns now to show what he is capable of. By Dean Bilton By Dean Bilton From now on, assume every pick is being passed until I tell you otherwise. By Dean Bilton Will be interesting to see if there are many more picks taken. By Dean Bilton   A mature-age, big-bodied midfielder who was overlooked in his draft year and has been carving the WAFL ever since. There is definitely a role for him with the Eagles who need that contested, hard-tackling bull. By Dean Bilton The Eagles get pick 62 from Port Adelaide for a future fourth round pick. By Dean Bilton A tidy hybrid defender who can play tall or small. The eighth player from the Sandringham Dragons to be selected in this draft. By Dean Bilton Another father-son, this is Peter's son. Again, you can guess what sort of player Jase is — a slick, skilful runner off half-back. He's very small for now, but he's too cool and crafty with the ball to be overlooked.  By Dean Bilton And there's the father-son selection! Glenn Archer's son Jackson is going to wear the blue and white just like the Shinboner of the Century. I think you can guess what sort of player he is. By Dean Bilton A quick and agile player who can run off half-back predominantly but is clever in front of goals too. By Dean Bilton   A big key forward who is strong above his head but can move around the ground very smoothly too. Another WA prospect for the Eagles. By Dean Bilton And heeere coooome the passes. By Dean Bilton They are done for the night."}, "/news/2021-11-25/michael-vaughan-dumped-bbc-ashes-commentary-yorkshire-racism/100649194": {"description": "Former England captain Michael Vaughan axed from BBC's Ashes coverage after racism allegations", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Former England captain Michael Vaughan will play no part in the BBC's coverage of the upcoming Ashes series after being accused of making racist comments to former Yorkshire player Azeem Rafiq. Rafiq alleged Vaughan told him and two other players of Asian origin that there were \"too many of you lot, we need to do something about it\" before a match in 2009. England player Adil Rashid and Pakistan international Rana Naved-ul-Hasan have also said they overheard Vaughan's alleged remarks. a storm surrounding the Yorkshire County Cricket Club \"While he is involved in a significant story in cricket, for editorial reasons we do not believe that it would be appropriate for Vaughan to have a role in our Ashes team or wider coverage of the sport at the moment,\" the BBC said in a statement. \"We require our contributors to talk about relevant topics and his involvement in the Yorkshire story represents a conflict of interest.\" the problems afflicting the sport \"Very disappointed not to be commentating for TMS (BBC Test Match Special) on the Ashes and will miss working with great colleagues and friends, but looking forward to being behind the mic for @foxcricket in Australia,\" he wrote on Instagram. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. \"The issues facing cricket are bigger than any individual case and I want to be part of the solution, listening, educating myself and helping to make it a more welcoming sport for all.\" The 47-year-old, who has been an analyst with the BBC since retiring as a Yorkshire player in 2009, was dropped from a BBC radio show earlier this month after the allegations came to light. Vaughan previously said he has been \"trashed unfairly\", calling it \"the worst thing I have ever experienced\". The first men's Ashes Test starts at the Gabba on December 8.  "}, "/news/2021-11-25/champions-league-real-madrid-manchester-city-knockout-stages/100648980": {"description": "Man City tops Champions League group, Real Madrid reach knockout stages", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " European giants Real Madrid and Manchester City have booked their spots in the knockout stages of the Champions League with a group game up their sleeve. Both sides won on Thursday (AEDT), with Madrid beating Moldovan rivals Sheriff Tiraspol, while City took down star-studded French side Paris St Germain thanks to a Gabriel Jesus 76th-minute winner. The 2-1 win at the Etihad Stadium ensured City would top Group A before playing their last game against RB Leipzig. PSG also advanced to the last 16 thanks to Leipzig's big 5-0 win over Club Brugge, but the loss highlighted their continued problems in finding an effective way to harness their star-studded attack. City dominated playing with their usual invention and verve in the first half while PSG's front three of Lionel Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappe too often watched on from afar. The most Paris managed before the interval was a breakaway that ended with Mbappe curling a shot over the bar, but his aim was better four minutes after the break when he drilled the ball home at the back post after Messi's cross deflected off Kyle Walker into the French forward's path. City drew level when Raheem Sterling poked home at the back post after a lovely ball from Rodri had set up Walker for a trademark low cross. Neymar squandered a chance to retake the lead, and City always looked the more likely to win the game, with Mahrez and Bernardo Silva asking plenty of questions and Gundogan taking charge in midfield in the absence of Kevin de Bruyne, who missed the game after testing positive for COVID-19. Mahrez created the winner, floating a ball to Silva at the far post and the Portuguese midfielder showed a deft touch to cushion the ball to Jesus who picked his spot. Meanwhile, Real Madrid did not have to work as hard as they turned around a shock September loss to Sheriff, strolling to a 3-0 win in their Group D clash. Real top the group on 12 points from five games, two more than second-placed Inter Milan, with the result also sending the Italian champions through after they beat Shakhtar Donetsk 2-0. Karim Benzema, who was handed a suspended one-year prison sentence earlier on Thursday David Alaba fired the visitors ahead with a deflected free kick in the 30th minute, with a shot from 22 metres leaving Sheriff goalkeeper Georgios Athanasiadis stranded after it clipped Cristiano's outstretched foot. Midfielder Toni Kroos doubled Real's lead on the stroke of half-time with a fine shot that cannoned in off the underside of the crossbar after a flowing move left the German midfielder with time and space to pick his spot. And Benzema made it 3-0 with a sublime effort from the edge of the penalty area into the bottom corner after he was teed up by left back Ferland Mendy in the 55th minute, as Real kept their foot on the pedal. Real are at home to Inter in their final group match, while Sheriff visit Shakhtar on December 7. Elsewhere, Liverpool, already destined for the knockout matches, stayed perfect with a 2-0 win over Porto, who stayed in second place ahead of a match against Atlético Madrid in two weeks that will help to determine which team qualifies with the English club.  "}, "/news/2021-11-25/candice-warner-weighs-in-on-tim-paine-scandal/100648906": {"description": "'It does make me worry': Candice Warner calls out Cricket Australia over Tim Paine scandal", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Candice Warner says she is \"concerned\" about Cricket Australia's stance on allowing Tim Paine to keep his place in the Test team. Paine resigned as Australian captain over a series of lewd texts sent to a Cricket Tasmania staffer in 2017 \"They're basically saying that it's not OK for an Australian cricket captain to send these messages, but it's OK for an Australian player,\" Warner, the wife of Test opener David Warner, said on 2GB radio. \"As a wife of an Australian player, that is slightly concerning and it does make me worry.\" Paine is still in line to play for Australia during the upcoming Ashes series, with the first Test set to begin at the Gabba on December 8. The wicketkeeper, who took over as captain from Steve Smith after the 2018 sandpaper ball-tampering scandal, is sure to be the target of English fans should he take to the field. Warner said her husband, who was one of the central figures of the sandpaper scandal, used the fan abuse as motivation. \"I don't know how Tim Paine will handle it, or if he will have to handle it,\" Warner said. \"But in regard to David and myself, you've got to look at it in a certain way. I know David looks at it as, 'If they're singing about me, they're worried about me.' \"So David uses it as a fuel to fire him up and get going. It is how you want to take it. It can affect people.\" Paine has been backed by teammate and spinner Nathan Lyon to keep his spot in the Australian XI for the opening Ashes Test. \"The selectors said they were going to pick the best available XI,\" Lyon said. \"In my eyes, Tim Paine is the best keeper in the world. \"This is very selfish — from a bowler's point of view — I want the best gloveman behind the stumps.\" Lyon said Paine provided immense confidence to Australia's bowling attack. \"Every bowler's relationship with the keeper is exceptional,\" he said. \"Tim Paine is a very lovable guy and very well respected. Tune in for the latest cricket news, interviews and analysis from the ABC team in the Grandstand Cricket Podcast. \"I'm pretty sure I'm speaking on behalf of every bowler that we want the best keeper. \"He's got my full support and I … guarantee he's got the full support of the Australian change room.\" Lyon said he did not expect the media attention surrounding Paine's resignation would be a distraction during the Ashes series. \"We're professional athletes, we know what we have to do and how we've got to go about it,\" he said. \"Tim made a mistake a few years ago. \"He showed a lot of courage and he's owned that mistake.\""}, "/news/2021-11-25/melbourne-renegades-harmanpreet-kaur-wbbl/100648914": {"description": "Renegades' Indian star Harmanpreet Kaur named WBBL Player of the Tournament", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " In a WBBL first, an Indian player has taken out the season's top individual gong, with T20 international captain and Melbourne Renegades star Harmanpreet Kaur voted Player of the Tournament. Kaur had a dominant regular season in red, leading the Renegades' batting line with 399 runs alongside a club-high 15 wickets. It's just-reward for the Indian all-rounder, who also took home Player of the Match honours three times for her game-changing contributions. Kaur was voted as the competition's top player by the standing umpires at each match. She polled a total of 31 votes, finishing three clear of Perth Scorchers duo Beth Mooney and Sophie Devine, who each received 28 votes. Brisbane Heat's Grace Harris (25 votes) was close behind, while her team-mate Georgia Redmayne and Hurricanes batter Mignon du Preez (24 votes) rounded out the top six. Kaur becomes just the third international player to win the league's top individual award, following New Zealand's Sophie Devine (twice) and Amy Satterthwaite. Beth Mooney, Meg Lanning, and Ellyse Perry are also previous Australian recipients. The award complements Kaur's inclusion in the WBBL Team of the Season, captained by Perth Scorchers star Sophie Devine. \"I'm extremely delighted; it's something very big that I have achieved,\" Kaur said. \"I'm very thankful to my team and all the support staff, they have been great during this time and have supported me a lot. It's been totally a team effort, I was just doing the job the team was requiring of me. \"We have a team that has gelled together. We support each other and that's what we have been doing ... I haven't put any extra pressure on myself, I've just enjoyed being here and supporting my teammates.\" Kaur, who missed the Renegades' final regular-season match loss to the Brisbane Heat due to illness, has confirmed she's fit and ready to face the Adelaide Strikers in tonight's Challenger final at Adelaide Oval. The winner will take on the Perth Scorchers in Saturday's final at Perth Stadium. Sydney Thunder youngster Phoebe Litchfield has also been named the WBBL's 'Young Gun' in just her second full season in the competition. The award is given to the best player under the age of 21 and is selected by Cricket Australia's National Selection Panel. The 18-year-old batter juggled her NSW Higher School Certificate commitments while starring at number three for an injury-plagued Thunder side, scoring 263 runs throughout the tournament. Previous winners of the Young Gun award include Darcie Brown, Hannah Darlington, Georgia Wareham, Sophie Molineux, Ashleigh Gardner, and Lauren Cheatle. \"It means a lot to be recognised with this award,\" Litchfield said. \"It's a surprise, to be honest. I could think of a number of other young players who would be deserving of this award, which is really exciting for the future. \"Batting at number three was a challenge but also a great opportunity. I was very privileged that Trevor Griffin trusted me with that spot and I hope I made the most of it.\""}, "/news/2021-11-25/23-under-23-a-league-women-players-2023-womens-world-cup/100623874": {"description": "With the 2023 World Cup around the corner, 23 young A-League Women's players are hoping to make their mark", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Australia's top professional women's competition has long been a greenhouse for producing some of the most exciting talent in world football. The A-League Women's former iteration, the W-League, was home to players like Sam Kerr, Kyah Simon, Steph Catley and Alanna Kennedy, who would go on to play not only for the senior Matildas, but also for some of the biggest domestic clubs in the world like Chelsea, Arsenal, and Manchester City. So as the Australian competition enters its new, independent era under the Australian Professional Leagues, it has once again become the shop window for young, exciting players who could go on to become the next Kerr, Simon, Catley, or Kennedy. And with the 2023 Women's World Cup on the horizon, there are few seasons quite as important as this one for spotting the next big superstar who could make an impact on home soil in 18 months' time. So who are some of the young players to keep an eye on for the 2021/22 A-League Women's season?   Touted as one of the most promising young goalkeepers in Australia, Annalee Grove finally has a chance to cement herself as Adelaide's first-choice shot-stopper after spending the majority of her career to date on the bench. Having joined the league in 2016, Grove only made her senior debut last season, helping the Reds concede the equal third-fewest goals across the competition. Now, with veteran Sian Fryer-McLaren moving on and youngster Miranda Templeman coming in behind her, the Young Matildas glove-woman is primed to earn some consistent match minutes and prove why she has been part of the youth national team ranks for so long.               After being ruled out of last season with an ACL injury, Young Matildas full-back Chelsea Blissett has re-signed for Melbourne City to gain back some of the ground she started treading in 2018/19. With shades of Ellie Carpenter to her style, Blissett has an equally impressive engine, able to get up and down the field in the modern attacking full-back role. Her unapologetic defensive approach and bucketloads of potential have seen City hand Blissett a three-year contract, proof of their confidence in her trajectory over the next World Cup cycle.   This will be Davidson's second season at Melbourne City after making 11 appearances for Brisbane Roar between 2018 and 2020. The Young Matilda was one of City's most consistent players in their most recent season, playing all but four minutes and winning the Coaches Award by campaign's end. Understated and adaptable, Davidson can transition seamlessly from defensive to attacking rhythms, shown in last season's statistics where she made 12 clearances and 16 interceptions in addition to nine key attacking passes. With more experience under her belt, she's expected to be one of City's most valuable regular starters this season.       Joining Victory from the Wanderers in the off-season, young defender Courtney Nevin has a lot of competition when it comes to the left side of defence. Making her mark in the 2019/20 campaign, where she started every game and demonstrated her lethal left-footed abilities from corners and free kicks, Nevin's most recent club season was hampered by injuries, but her call-up to the Matildas in Tokyo and recent friendlies showed the work she'd been putting in behind the scenes. She slotted in almost seamlessly as a Steph Catley replacement, while also showing her versatility as a wide or central defender in a back three. A transfer to the reigning champions only further confirms her qualities as one of Australia's most exciting young defenders.           Alongside Mihocic, another emerging Australian centre-back who has been on national team radars is Jessika Nash. Already with a senior club season under her belt, having debuted and started regularly for Canberra United last year, the Young Footballer of the Year nominee for 2020/21 has moved to reigning premiers Sydney FC for the upcoming season. Nash's defensive maturity, natural leadership, and calmness on the ball resulted in her captaining the Junior Matildas at the 2019 AFC U-16 Women's Championships, as well as her first senior call-up against the USA in this month's friendlies. With veteran Sky Blues defender Ellie Brush stepping away after re-injuring her ACL, Nash will likely be Sydney's starting centre-back: a role that will truly test whether, as many believe, Nash is a future Matildas captain and anchor of Australia's central defence.   After returning from two season-ending knee injuries, and having been the understudy of former club captain Teresa Polias for several seasons, Young Matilda Taylor Ray now has the clear air of Polias's maternity absence to cement herself as Sydney FC's starting defensive midfielder. Indeed, Ray has developed many of the attributes that have made Polias a legend of the Australian women's game: an indefatigable motor, an advanced reading of space, calmness under pressure, and the ability to control a game's tempo. With more competitive minutes under her belt, it is likely Ray will become a serious contender as thoughts turn to who will succeed the retired Aivi Luik and injury-prone Elise Kellond-Knight at the base of senior Matildas midfield into the future.     She's been scoring goals for fun at youth national team level, winning the Golden Boot at various Oceania competitions over the past few years (including 21 goals at the OFC U-19 Championships), but Kiwi striker Kelli Brown has yet to crack into the senior Ferns team. She was crucial in New Zealand's historic bronze medal at the FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup in 2018, alongside fellow Phoenix striker Grace Wisnewski, the latter of whom scored a brace against Canada in the deciding match. Together, the two strikers are seen as the future of the Ferns' attack, and will use their debut professional season with New Zealand's first women's team to accelerate that trajectory.   It's fitting that a club made up of an eclectic mix of New Zealand and Australian players should sign a Kiwi midfielder who has grown up playing football in Australia. Having moved to northern NSW when she was five, Te Reremoana Walker, the former captain of New Zealand's U-17 national team, has been plying her trade with the Newcastle Jets academy in the NPL. On the cusp of making her senior Jets debut this season, Wellington came knocking instead. Walker, who also has caps for the Aotearoa Māori Women's team, jumped at the chance to represent the nation of her birth. The sturdy, tidy midfielder has not yet been capped at senior level, and her form this season could pose an interesting tug-of-war between the two nations as their joint-World Cup draws near.   She was one of the unexpected call-ups to the senior Matildas squad that took on Brazil in October's friendlies, but for those familiar with teenage striker Bryleeh Henry at youth level, her call-up was far from a shock. The intense, pacey forward caught the attention of national team head coaches while terrorising defences in the NSW NPL, working her way through the age groups before making her senior club debut with Western Sydney last year. She scored two goals in six appearances then, and now under the wing of former Matilda Catherine Cannuli – and with the wind in her senior Matildas sails – Henry will be building upon that promising first dip into professional football to secure her spot as the club's starting striker.  "}, "/news/2021-11-25/netball-sharon-finnan-white-indigenous-diamonds-pathways-program/100645752": {"description": "How a former Diamond plans to see more Indigenous netballers at the elite level ", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " It's been 21 years since an Indigenous netballer played for the Australian Diamonds. The last representative was Sharon Finnan-White, one of only two Indigenous players to ever wear the green and gold. \"I've heard lots of stories of unconscious bias, and bias against our players when they go and stand for selection at that representative level within associations,\" Finnan-White said. \"Lots of stories of racism. \"That kind of environment is not welcoming for anyone, let alone our own people, so it does turn a lot of our players away.\" when the only Indigenous player in the Super Netball, Jemma Mi Mi, was left off the court during the 2020 Indigenous round Declaration of Commitment was signed by 20 of the sport's peak bodies The result of this on-court controversy fostered a relationship between Finnan-White and Aunty Roma Pregarc, who is based in Brisbane. They collaborated to develop an \"Indigenous Diamonds Pathway Program\" in Queensland, mentoring young, promising talent. The inaugural squad is comprised of more than a dozen young netballers from Alice Springs to Palm Island, training in Townsville three times a week, ahead of their debut in a local premiership league next season. Kyanne Priestley took four flights over two days to travel from her home in Alice Springs just to make pre-season training. The 16-year-old is currently looking at boarding schools in Townsville to continue being a part of the program. \"I feel like a lot of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander girls get overlooked, so I feel like this is an opportunity for all of us girls to step up,\" Priestley said. Teammate Tarna Stewart is a local from Townsville and said the first few weeks of training have already boosted her confidence. \"Ever since I was six, I don't see as [many] Indigenous people playing [Super Netball],\" the now 16-year-old said. Her mother, Naomi Stanley, has seen the benefits firsthand. \"Sharon's been a great role model for them, letting them know where to go from here and where to go, move up, more forward,\" Naomi Stanley said. Finnan-White and Aunty Roma's aim is to not only offer Indigenous players elite coaching, but also to do so in a culturally safe environment. The only two Indigenous netballers to have played for Australia call for action from state and national bodies to provide support and funding to improve diversity in the sport. The former Diamond fears Indigenous netballers aren't progressing to elite levels for several reasons, including intergenerational trauma. \"It is important for the netball community to understand the historic events that caused this trauma and how it deeply affects every aspect of our lives,\" Finnan-White said. Finnan-White has set an ambitious goal, to foster enough talent for an All-Indigenous team in the Super Netball within the next five years. Early conversations have taken place with stakeholders, but the former Diamond said systemic change and funding is needed to make her dreams become reality. \"We'd like that team to be based here in North Queensland because we have a lot of deep of talent to draw from in this region,\" she said. \"I think just putting it out there and laying it on the table, we're hoping that someone will join us on this journey and help us to create a legacy.\""}, "/news/2021-11-24/shaun-murphy-amateurs-not-play-professional-snooker-tournaments/100648460": {"description": "Former champion says amateur snooker players should not play pro tournaments, after losing to 19-year-old", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Professional snooker player Shaun Murphy says it is \"not fair\" that amateurs are allowed to compete in professional tournaments, after crashing out of the UK Championship to a 19-year-old. Murphy, who won the UK Championship in 2008, was defeated by Chinese amateur Si Jiahui 6-5 in the opening round match in the English city of York.  The UK Championship is one of snooker's three major tournaments, with Murphy bemoaning his loss to BBC Radio 5 Live after his early exit.  \"I am going to sound like a grumpy old man but that young man shouldn't be in the tournament,\" he said. \"It is not fair. It is not right.\" Si was a professional for the last two snooker seasons but dropped off the main tour at the end of the 2020–2021 season, which ended in May. He was added as a wild card to this year's UK Championship and was widely expected to be defeated by Murphy, a former world champion. However, his shock win moved him through to the final-64, while Murphy said he felt \"hard done by\" because the victory was not as important to his opponent. \"I don't know why we, as a sport, allow amateurs to compete in professional tournaments. This is our livelihood. This is our living,\" he said. \"The other 127 runners and riders in the tournament, it is their livelihood, too. \"It is wrong, in my opinion, to walk into somebody who is not playing with the same pressures and concerns I am. \"He played like a man who does not have a care in the world, because he does not have a care in the world. It is not fair. It is not right.\" Si led the best of 11-frames contest 5-1 before Murphy pegged him back to level the match.  Murphy had his opportunity to win the deciding frame, but a missed shot on the blue ball late allowed Si back at the table to win the match.  It is the biggest win of Si's short career, with his best result in a professional tournament coming in the 2019 English Open when he made the final 16.  “I am not picking on him as a young man. He deserved his victory,\" Murphy said.  \"Since turning professional at 15, I have earned the right to call myself a professional snooker player. He hasn’t done that. He shouldn’t be on the table.” Australian Neil Robertson, who is the defending champion, will play 32-year-old Englishman John Astley in his first-round match on Thursday. "}, "/news/2021-11-24/afl-national-draft-kangaroos-jason-horne-francis-number-one-pick/100648222": {"description": "Kangaroos take Horne-Francis with number one selection in AFL draft", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Outstanding South Australian prospect Jason Horne-Francis has been selected by North Melbourne with the top pick in the AFL's national draft. Horne-Francis was widely tipped to be selected at number one in this evening's draft conducted in Melbourne, and the Kangaroos will be hoping the highly touted midfielder will play a key role as the club continues its AFL rebuild. The 18-year-old is the first South Australian to be selected at number one in the draft since Bryce Gibbs was picked by Carlton in 2006. It is the first time since 2010 a player outside of Victoria has been selected at number one in the draft. Horne-Francis — who played for South Adelaide in the SANFL — is also the Kangaroos' first number one selection in draft history. He remained in Adelaide for the draft, which allowed South Australian and revered North Melbourne premiership player Malcolm Blight to present him with his new club's jersey. Before Wednesday night's national draft, Jason Horne-Francis spoke of his journey to the AFL. \"I can't wait to get into things with the North Melbourne footy club,\" Horne-Francis told Fox Footy. \"I think North are on the right direction, they've got a lot of young talented midfielders and I think I can learn a lot off players at the club.\" Horne-Francis is set to feature in North Melbourne's best line-up in 2022 under coach David Noble, who will be in his second season in charge at Arden Street. In what was no surprise, the Western Bulldogs snared ruck-forward Sam Darcy, whose father Luke is regarded as a club great. GWS put in a bid on Darcy with pick two, but as expected it was matched by the Bulldogs. In another father-son selection, Collingwood took midfielder Nick Daicos with the overall fourth pick after matching Gold Coast's bid for the 18-year-old. Daicos's father Peter was a legendary player for Collingwood, helping the club win the 1990 premiership. Nick Daicos — who joins his brother Josh at the Magpies — will wear his father's famous number 35 jersey. \"It's a great tradition for the AFL, but I might be being a bit biased,\" he said about the father-son rule. \"There are a few Collingwood boys running around as father-sons. I think they have been pretty lucky with it all.\" Meanwhile, the Giants used the third pick in the draft to select midfielder Finn Callaghan, while Gold Coast chose ruck-forward Mac Andrew with its top selection at number five. Josh Rachele (six, Adelaide), Josh Ward (seven, Hawthorn), Jye Amiss (eight, Fremantle), Josh Gibcus (nine, Richmond) and Neil Erasmus (10, Fremantle) rounded out the top 10 picks."}, "/news/2021-11-24/wbbl-brisbane-heat-vs-adelaide-strikers-eliminator-live-updates/100643966": {"description": "Adelaide Strikers stay alive in WBBL finals with win over Brisbane Heat", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Adelaide Strikers spinner Amanda-Jade Wellington produced the best bowling display in WBBL history to help lift her side to a crushing eight-wicket victory over the Brisbane Heat in 'The Eliminator'. Wellington snared an incredible 5-8 from her four overs as the Heat slumped to 7-52 in the 12th over at Adelaide Oval on Wednesday night. Only a late cameo from Nicola Hancock (40 off 26 balls) and a brave effort from the injured Nadine de Klerk (18 not out off 25 balls) saved the Heat from complete embarrassment as the two-time champions limped to 8-114. De Klerk was in pain every time she went for a run after being struck on the inside of her left knee while scrambling through for a single early in her innings. In reply, the Strikers cruised to the victory target with 21 balls to spare. Katie Mack (50 not out off 42 balls) and Tahlia McGrath (38 not out off 27 balls) combined for an unbeaten 71-run stand to make easy work of the run chase. The Strikers will now take on the Melbourne Renegades in Adelaide on Thursday in 'The Challenger' for the right to face off against the Perth Scorchers in Saturday's final in Perth. Wellington, playing her 100th WBBL match and pushing for an international recall, was unplayable at times during her mesmerising spell. The 24-year-old's first victim was star opener Grace Harris, who charged down the wicket and was subsequently stumped after being outdone by the spin. Mikayla Hinkley fell two balls later when she edged a sharp-turning delivery to slip, and Jessica Jonassen was bowled by Wellington in the ninth over. Wellington was on a hat-trick in the 11th over after snaring Laura Kimmince and Georgia Voll in consecutive deliveries. De Klerk was able to keep out the hat-trick delivery, but it was far from convincing after the ball fizzed sharply to hit the shoulder of her bat. Just as all hope looked lost for the Heat, Hancock whacked six fours and a six to at least give her team a defendable target. Wellington's bowling figures beat out the previous WBBL best of 5-15 by Molly Strano while playing for the Renegades at the MCG in 2016.  "}, "/news/2021-11-24/afl-carlton-ceo-brian-cook-tests-positive-to-covid-19/100648142": {"description": "Carlton AFL boss returns positive COVID test", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Carlton chief executive Brian Cook has tested positive to COVID-19, forcing key staff members to miss tonight's AFL national draft in Melbourne. The fully vaccinated Cook will isolate at home for the next 10 days as per Victorian government guidelines. The positive test means the club's recruiting team — including head coach Michael Voss and football manager Brad Lloyd — will not attend the first night of the draft, as they have been identified as close contacts. The Blues released a statement saying all their AFL players had been instructed to get tested and self-isolate at home until they received a negative result. \"My main concern is the health and safety of our people, I sincerely appreciate all of them getting tested this afternoon at short notice,\" Cook said in the statement. \"I am feeling okay, thankfully, which is further evidence of why it is so important for people to be vaccinated.\" The Blues' AFLW program has not been impacted and has been cleared to continue its preseason training. having joined the club following a successful career as Geelong's chief executive  his Essendon counterpart Xavier Campbell testing positive last week"}, "/news/2021-11-24/teen-star-sophie-dwyer-headlines-aussie-diamonds-team/100644088": {"description": "Rising star Sophie Dwyer earns call-up to Australian squad ", "article_category": "sport", "article_text": " Giants goal-attack Sophie Dwyer has been elevated from a Diamonds tour invitee to a senior member of the Australian netball squad for the Quad Series against England, New Zealand and South Africa in January. Set in London, the series will be vital preparation for the Birmingham Commonwealth Games, especially considering the Diamonds won't have taken to the court since losing the Constellation Cup in March. The news comes off the back of Dwyer's breakout Super Netball season, in a year where she was largely expected to play the role of an impact player off the bench. Back in 2020, the teenager debuted as part of the extended Giants squad, playing just twice during the season for a total of eight minutes. Her accuracy and long-range shooting impressed, but it was clear she still needed some time to grow into her potential. This year the 19-year-old re-signed as a fully contracted player, performing well in the pre-season against previous champions the Melbourne Vixens and Sunshine Coast Lightning. Yet she was still third in line, sitting behind Giants captain and English veteran Jo Harten, and 24-year-old Diamonds shooter Kiera Austin. Unfortunately, just 20 minutes into the team's first match of the season, Austin ruptured her ACL, requiring Dwyer to step up and play the rest of the game. Despite the devastating injury to her close friend and teammate, Dwyer didn't skip a beat, splitting the shooting load with Harten to finish at 79 per cent accuracy (22/27 goals, 4/6 super shots). That performance set the tone for the rest of Dwyer's Super Netball campaign, going on to occupy the starting goal-attack position for the Giants' remaining 17 matches. She also finished the season high on the stats list, coming in second overall for super shots (52) and in the top 10 for total goals scored (371). Her selection into the Diamonds squad is therefore likely to be welcomed by netball fans, who have enjoyed the ice queen's cool, calm and collected approach to the game — never seeming to be fazed by her famous and more experienced opponents. In fact, Dwyer is the frontrunner to take out this year's Super Netball Young Gun Award, but it's a tag she is actually trying hard to shake. In December she'll turn 20, a birthday she says she is looking forward to in order to shed her teenager status. \"I had a chat with Stacey [Marinkovich] at the beginning of the Diamonds camp about how I didn't want to be thought of as the young player helping to make up numbers in the squad,\" she told the ABC. \"This whole year, everyone put me in the spotlight as the new kid in town and when I went into that national environment, I really wanted to be seen on a level playing field and treated the same as the other senior players. \"I wanted to prove I deserved to be there and I think that mentality was able to help me develop and push myself to play with some of the best in Australia.\" Whether she enjoys people celebrating her rise to the top at such an early stage in her career or not, Dwyer's drive to be better has meant she has always been playing at a level well beyond her years. Prior to being signed by the Giants and making her debut in the top tier of the sport, she was already a well-known name in her home state, playing in NSW Premier League grand finals for the Eastwood Ryde Hawks and claiming Player of the Final honours at the age of 17 while representing the NSW Waratahs in the 2019 Australian Netball League. Dwyer's hard work has clearly won over the Aussie Diamonds coaches and selectors, who have fast-tracked her position into the team since their camp in September and October. \"When I was asked to be a tour invitee, I was over the moon, I didn't expect it. \"Now I'm part of the team, I'm even more excited... I'm still coming to terms with it.\" It's a sign that head coach Stacey Marinkovich and her team are looking to the future, investing their time in the next generation of Diamonds with a current shortage of experienced Australian shooters to pick from in Super Netball. Former captain and centurion Caitlin Bassett's stance on the unlimited imports rule has been made clear during the off-season, as she has openly struggled to find a club to take her on with eight internationals occupying shooting roles across seven Super Netball teams next year. Dwyer has a different view and believes there are still opportunities out there for Australian shooters, but that they have to make the most of them when they arise. \"I can definitely see both sides of the argument on imports. \"Personally I think their involvement makes it the best league in the world and someone like Jo Harten is such a valued part of our team that I don't think we would be the Giants without her. \"It's tricky… but with the squad size only being 10 and the rolling subs rule, everyone really does have to be ready to step up at any moment and that has to be part of your mindset when you get an opportunity to play. \"Hopefully the Australian Netball Championships and underage nationals can actually happen next year, because those events really help to identify and develop players for Super Netball.\"   Gretel Bueta Sophie Dwyer Sophie Garbin Cara Koenen Steph Wood (vice-captain)   Ash Brazill Paige Hadley Kate Moloney Jamie-Lee Price Liz Watson (captain)   Yet to be announced"}}